                                                  OBDD RFP No. C2021507
                                            Oregon Buys #S-12300-00006688




         busin              S
                Ore                        ni.

        Request for Proposals:
   “Strategic Planning Consultant”

Proposal due date: May 16, 2023, at 3:00 p.m. Pacific Time
10          SOLICITATION INFORMATION AND REQUIREMENTS
1.1         GENERAL              INFORMATION
The Oregon Business Development Department (“Business Oregon” or “Department’’) is seeking
proposals from consultants to guide its development of a comprehensive three-year strategic plan.
Competitive candidates will have organizational and economic development expertise.

The new strategic plan should build from the previous five-year strategic plan (2018-2022), and also
leverage other recent plans produced by the Department, such as Business Oregon’s IT Strategic Plan
(2019), Employee Engagement Survey (2021), Oregon Innovation Plan (2021), Business Oregon
Diversity Equity and Inclusion Assessment (2021), Strategic Assessment of Incentives (2021), and
COVID Economic Recovery Plan (2022).

The budget for this solicitation is not predetermined but is expected to be no more than $150,000,
beginning upon contract execution and concluding on December 31, 2023.

12          DESCRIPTION OF SERVICES NEEDED \ PROPOSED STATEMENT                         OF WORK
Proposed Tasks
The selected Proposer will engage in strategic planning consultation with Department staff and an
advisory committee. The selected proposer will also conduct strategic plan development tasks including:
preparation, research, surveys, community engagement, facilitation of meetings, information gathering,
draft plan development, plan refinements, meetings with stakeholders, final recommendations, and
ultimately creating the final strategic plan. The plan will be informed from a 360° analysis with
participation from internal teams, partner organizations, and recipients of Department’s program
funding.
The plan shall identify high-level objectives specifically related to Business Oregon’s existing mission,
vision, and values. The plan shall also include an analysis of the Department’s strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and threats (SWOT analysis). In addition to the SWOT analysis, an analysis of external
factors impacting the agency should be conducted using the PESTLE approach (Political, Economical,
Sociological, Technological, Legal, and Environmental). The plan will also deliver strategies that can be
used to achieve the Department’s measurable objectives and provide recommended metrics to gauge
how successful the Department achieving those objectives.

The planning process will incorporate data and research and consider innovative approaches to serve
Oregon’s unique regional communities. The process to develop the plan will require analysis and
consideration of external factors, economic and workforce trends, and their impact on the Department’s
approach to economic development.

The successful proposer will not conduct research and then produce a strategic plan in a vacuum. Rather,
the selected Proposer will demonstrate how they will facilitate the creation of a plan with Business
Oregon, including: facilitating staff conversations and ideas, receiving feedback from stakeholders, and
rendering it into a written plan as we go through the process together.




C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                        Page   2
Key deliverables include:

A written comprehensive strategic plan outlining in detail each objective for Business Oregon,
supporting strategies to achieve each objective, and examples of tactics to carry out the strategies.

In addition to objectives for the overall organization, three additional sets of objectives shall be
developed, specific to:
    1. Improving customer service.
      2.    What type of data the Department should collect, manage, and share with the public.
      2.    How the Department should run its internal operations.

The strategic plan shall also include metrics for how Business Oregon can measure its success in
carrying out the objectives of the strategic plan. Metrics should be SMART (specific, measurable,
attainable, relevant, and timely). An executive summary and PowerPoint deck shall also be produced to
be used by Business Oregon in sharing the strategic plan with stakeholders.

      1.    Department SWOOT Analysis:          A SWOT analysis of the organization, informed through
             industry-accepted processes.
               a.   Strengths
               b.   Weaknesses
               c.   Opportunities
               d.   Threats

      2.    Agency PESTLE Analysis: Analysis of external factors impacting the agency, informed through
            industry-accepted processes using the PESTLE approach.

                        Political
              monoses




                        Economical
                        Social
                        Technological
                        Legal
                        Environmental

      3.    Department Goals (priorities/objectives): What are the overarching objectives of the
            organization? Currently, these are the “priorities” in the Department’s 2018-2022 strategic plan.
                a. Business Goals
                b. Customer Service Goals: Who are Business Oregon’s customers and how could the
                    Department meet their needs more efficiently and effectively?
                c. Data Goals: How do our business and customer service goals tie to the key performance
                    metrics data we should collect and measure

      4.    Department Operations Plan: The Department does not have a separate and distinct Operations
            Plan, the priority/objective to “Ensure an Inclusive, Transparent, and Fiscally Healthy
            Organization” and its underlying strategies in the previous 2018-22 strategic plan are relevant to
            the requested “Operations Plan.”
                 a.  Operations Plan Narrative
                 b.  Operations Plan Objectives: Refine internal operational goal, provide operational
                     strategies to align with agency priorities.



C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                            Page    3
13          QUESTIONS AND CLARIFICATIONS
All inquiries, whether relating to the RFP process, administration, deadline or award, or to the intent or
technical aspects of the services must be submitted via email to:
      Mindee Sublette, Procurement and Contracts Specialist
      Oregon Business Development Department
      775 Summer St., NE, Suite 200
      Salem, OR 97301-1280
      Telephone: 971-600-7974
      Email: mindee.sublette @biz.oregon.gov
All questions must be received not later than (5) calendar days prior to Proposal due date specified on
the title page of this RFP.
Substantive questions and answers will be issued as official addenda to this RFP. Changes or
modifications to this RFP shall be binding on Department only if in the form of written addenda issued
by Department.
The Department will provide addenda only to firms directly solicited. Anyone who has received a copy
of this RFP from a source other than Department is responsible for checking with designated
procurement staff - aside from requested copies, Department is not responsible for sending addenda to
any unknown potential Proposers.
Department may require any clarification it needs to understand a Proposal.

14          PROTESTS AND REQUESTS

1.4.1       RFP PROTESTS AND CHANGE               REQUESTS
Proposers who believe RFP specifications are unnecessarily restrictive or limit competition, or who wish
to suggest scope of work elements or revised scoring criteria more likely to assist in selecting the best
Proposer, are encouraged to submit a solicitation “protest.’”’ All protests concerning the RFP must be
submitted in writing to the procurement staff person identified in section 1.3 not later than seven
calendar days prior to the Proposal due date specified on the cover page of this RFP. A protest must
clearly, specifically and in detail explain the reason(s) for the protest and specify any proposed changes
to the RFP specifications. Department will respond to protests in writing. Department will not consider
any solicitation protest submitted after the deadline established in this subsection.

1.4.2       NO AWARD                PROTEST REQUIREMENTS
As an Intermediate Procurement, no award protest opportunity is required or allowed.

15          DUE DATE
Proposals must be received by May 16, 2023, on or before 3:00 p.m. Pacific Time. Absolutely no
Proposals will be accepted after this date and time. Department relies on the State of Oregon email system
clock to determine the correct time and is not responsible for any delays or difficulties experienced in the
transmission of any Proposal. Please do not wait until the last minute to email your Proposal; it will
be too late to correct any problems.




C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                        Page   4
16          ELECTRONIC RESPONSES BY OREGON BUYS AND EMAIL ONLY
Only electronic proposals sent by email are acceptable. Proposals sent by fax, regular mail, and
physical deliveries are not acceptable. Please reference the RFP title and RFP number in the email
subject line.
Proposals will be received only at the following email address: mindee.sublette @ biz.oregon.gov.
The Department will accept Proposals as PDF electronic files. Files in excess of 15 megabytes must be
submitted incrementally. Proposals must not be submitted as .zip, .exe or .com files, only PDF.

1.7         NOLATE             OR MISDIRECTED SUBMISSION OF PROPOSALS
Submittals that are late or misdirected will be considered non-responsive, without exception. The
Department is not responsible for errors of any kind involved with electronic submission, nor for
notifying Proposers of complete or incomplete receipt of a Proposal.

18          FORMAT             FOR PROPOSALS
A Proposal must be organized in accordance with the list of scored criteria in section 2.2. A Proposal
must not exceed 20 pages, excluding cover sheet (Attachment A) and the requested references.
Department will consider the pages up to the allowable number overall and specified in specific
subsections of section 2.2 and discard all pages in excess of the allowable number.
One (1) page is defined as: one side of a single 8-1/2" x 11" page, with 12-point minimum font size for
the substantive text. Proposers may use their discretion for the font size of other materials (e.g.,
graphics, charts). Any page or partial page with substantive text, graphics, charts, resumes, etc., will be
counted as one (1) page.

19          COVER SHEET
A Proposal must include a completed Cover Sheet (substantially in the form of Attachment A), signed
by a duly authorized representative of the Proposer empowered to bind the Proposer.

1.10        PUBLIC RECORDS
This RFP, and one copy of every proposal accepted in response to it, will be kept by Department and
made a part of its records. All accepted Proposals will become part of the public file without obligation
to Department. If a Proposal contains any information that may be exempt from disclosure under the
Oregon Public Records Law, ORS 192.410 through 192.505, the Proposer must clearly designate that
portion of its Proposal it considers to be exempt, along with a justification and citation to the authority
relied upon. Application of the Uniform Trade Secrets Act (UTSA), ORS 646.461 and 646.475, and the
Oregon Public Records Law will determine whether any information is actually exempt from disclosure.
Identifying an entire Proposal as exempt from disclosure is not acceptable and will not be effective to
exempt the Proposal or any part of it from disclosure. Failure to identify the portion of the Proposal
claimed as exempt from disclosure, and to specify a justification and the authority relied upon, will be
deemed a waiver of any future claim based on disclosure of that information.

1.11        TERMS AND CONDITIONS
By submitting its Proposal, the selected Proposer agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of a
standard State of Oregon Personal/Professional Services Contract, including requirements for insurance
as determined by Department. Any Proposal that is conditioned on Department’s acceptance of any
other terms and conditions or rights to negotiate will be rejected as non-responsive.



C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                         Page    5
      PROPOSAL SUBMISSION CHECKLIST FOR USE BY PROPOSERS - INFORMATION ONLY
            Due Date Met
            Proposal Addressed Correctly
 KOOL

            Proposal in Acceptable Electronic File Type(s)
            Proposal Format and Page Limit Requirements Met
            Signed Cover Sheet (Attachment A) Included
            List of References (Attachment B) Included
            Proposal Does Not Include Conditional Language About Terms and Conditions
            Public Records Disclosure Exemption Statement Included (If Applicable)

2.0         INFORMATION REQUESTED FROM PROPOSERS; SCORED CRITERIA

2.1         REFERENCES
Proposers must fill out and submit RFP Attachment B, listing applicable references. References will not
be scored, but will be used as part of a “responsibility” check to verify the Proposer’s ability to perform.

2.2         SCORED INFORMATION
A) Qualifications                                                                           45 Points maximum
Please submit answers to the following prompts:
      1.) Name the person or people who would conduct the work described above and briefly describe
          their qualifications and relevant individual experiences.
      2.) Explain any expertise specific to strategic planning, preferably for public entities.
      3.) Briefly describe not more than three projects performed that are most comparable to the
            requested services, including their date, duration, scope, and outcomes.
B) Project Approach                                                                         45 Points maximum
      1.) Please provide a detailed description of the techniques, approaches, and methods that you will
          use to deliver the planning project as requested. You may also critique the proposed statement of
          work in section 1.2 with any recommended changes or optional tasks to include.
      2.) Please discuss strategies for engaging a diverse group of stakeholders, tribes, communities,
          businesses, and other partners. Include your experience engaging with diverse communities.
      3.) Please provide a timeline of the project, as you would propose carrying it out.
C) Price (no page limit)                                                                    10 Points maximum

      1.) Please provide a breakdown of the costs associated with delivering the project as you have
          described in the previous sections. Please list billing rates for the team members listed, and any
          other costs.

3.0         EVALUATION PROCESS
The selection process will be administered in accordance with the authority and procedures in ORS
279B.070, and OAR Chapter 123, Division 6 and OAR             137-047- 0270. Proposals received on time will
be reviewed against any Pass/Fail criteria. Proposals meeting those criteria will be forwarded to an
evaluation committee that will independently score each Proposal according to the scored criteria in
Section 2.


C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                           Page    6
Without limiting the possibilities allowed under OAR 137-047-0270, the Department may, at any time
in its sole discretion, (a) provide notice to a Proposer of selection for Contract negotiation and possible
award; (b) gather more information for evaluation, (c) provide notice to a Proposer(s) of non-selection;
or (d) provide notification to Proposer(s) that the RFP is cancelled (and either that the RFP may be
resolicited or that Department intends to take no further action with respect to the RFP).
The Department reserves the right to employ any of the procedures allowed by Oregon Administrative
Rule 137-047-0270, such as additional competitive steps or Proposals, modified or additional selection
criteria, interviews, competitive simultaneous discussions or negotiations, etc. Information or issues
revealed by a Proposer’s questions or Proposal, may, in the Department’s sole discretion, trigger such
modifications or further steps. If there are further steps beyond the initial Proposal and scoring, the
scoring results from the first step and any subsequent step will be added together.
Department reserves the right to reject any or all Proposals for good cause if it is in the public interest,
and is not liable for any costs a Proposer incurs while preparing or presenting its Proposal or during
further evaluation stages.
4.0         NEGOTIATIONS
The Department, in its sole discretion, reserves the right to negotiate all terms and conditions in the
standard State of Oregon contract to the extent allowed by law.
If negotiations with the top ranked Proposer are not successful, Department may terminate negotiations
and begin negotiating with the next highest ranked Proposer.




C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                           Page   7
                   RFP ATTACHMENT                    A - COVER SHEET      & CERTIFICATIONS
                 STATEMENT                  OF PROPOSAL to Oregon Business Development Department
                                                      (Legal Name of Proposer) accepts all the terms and
conditions contained in the “Strategic Planning Consultant” RFP, and a standard State of Oregon
contract (as they may have been modified or reserved for negotiation).
L_] Corporation [_] Professional Corporation [_] Partnership [_] Limited Partnership
L_] Ltd. Liability Company [_] Ltd. Liability Partnership [_] Sole Proprietorship [_] Other
Mailing Address



Type name of contact/authorized representative
Email address
Telephone                                                 Other
Type name of person(s) authorized to sign Contract
Affirmative Action, Nondiscrimination: Department is an equal-employment-opportunity employer
and values diversity in its work force. It also requires Proposers to have an operating policy as an equal
employment opportunity employer, and to follow good faith diversity efforts when subcontracting.
We certify that we have a formal statement of nondiscrimination in employment policy and have an
affirmative action program if over 50 employees. (Firms of 50 people or less do not need a formal
program, but must have a policy). Does your firm have 50 or more employees? [|_| Yes [_] No
We also certify that we have not and will not discriminate against a subcontractor in the awarding of a
subcontract because the subcontractor is a minority, women or emerging small business enterprise
certified under ORS 200.055, and will follow good faith efforts in ORS 200.045 during any
subcontracting.
Responsibility Certifications
Has your company ever been declared in breach of any contract to provide services for unperformed or
defective work?
[_] Yes                              [_] No
If “yes,” explain.
Has any employee or agent of your company been convicted under state or federal law of
embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property or
any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty?
[_] Yes                              [_] No
If “yes,” explain.
Has your company or any employee or agent of your company been indicted under state or federal false
claims or antitrust laws, or charged with any other criminal offense arising out of obtaining, attempting
to obtain, or performing a public or private contract or subcontract? [_] Yes                [_] No
If “yes,” explain.
During the last ten years, has your firm changed majority ownership or been the debtor in a bankruptcy
case?      [_] Yes                   [_]   No



C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                         Page   8
If “yes,” explain.
Does your firm have any outstanding judgments pending against it? [_] Yes                      L_] No
If “yes,” explain.
During the last ten years, has your firm been a party to litigation, arbitration or mediation where the amount
in dispute exceeded $10,000? [_] Yes            [_] No
If “yes,” explain. (Include court, and party names.)
Conflicts of Interest: Please select (only) one of the following three options:
[|       Our firm has no current, known actual, potential, or reasonably perceived, financial or other
interest in the outcome of the services described in this RFP.
[       Our firm has a potential or reasonably perceived financial or other interest in the outcome of the
services described in this RFP as described here:                          . Our firm proposes to mitigate
the potential or perceived conflict according to the following plan:
[|     Our firm has an actual financial or other interest in the outcome of the services described in this
RFP as described here:
What does “financial interest” mean?
If your firm, or employee of your firm working on the project (or a member of the employee’s
household), will/may or may be perceived to receive or lose private income depending on government
business choices based on your firm’s services, findings or recommendations, this must be listed as a
financial interest. An example would be ownership in physical assets affected by government business
choices related to these services. The possibility of contracting for further consulting services is not
included in this definition and is not prohibited.
What does         “other interest” mean?

If your firm, or employee of your firm working on the project (or a member of the employee’s
household), will/may or may be perceived to have political, legal or any other interests that will affect
what goes into your firm’s services, findings or recommendations, or will be/may be, or may be
perceived to be, affected by government business choices related to these services, this must be listed as
an other interest.
Tax Information and Tax Compliance: The undersigned certifies and swears under penalty of perjury
that: I am authorized to act on behalf of Contractor, I have authority and knowledge regarding
Contractor’s payment of taxes, the taxpayer identification number and other information provided on
Contractor’s IRS W-9 form is correct, Contractor is not subject to tax withholding, and Contractor is not
in violation of any Oregon tax laws, including but not limited to a state tax imposed by ORS 320.005 to
320.150 and 403.200 to 403.250 and ORS chapters 118, 314, 316, 317, 318, 321 and 323 and the elderly
rental assistance program under ORS 310.630 to 310.706 and local taxes administered by the
Department of Revenue under ORS 305.620. Contractor shall continue to comply with the tax laws of
this state or a political subdivision of this state during the term of the public contract.

Signature of Authorized Representative certifying the truth of all statements:

[signature ]
[Type name]                                     Date




C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                           Page   9
                                  RFP ATTACHMENT B     - LIST OF REFERENCES

   Department may check to determine whether these references support Proposer’s ability to comply with the
   requirements of this RFP. Department may use references to obtain additional information, or verify any
   information needed. Department may contact any reference (submitted or not) to verify Proposer’s
   qualifications.
   Proposer must provide at least three references from current or former client for similar projects performed
   within the last four years. References must be able to verify the quality of that related work.



   1.    Reference Entity Name:

   Reference Contact Name:

   Contact Telephone Number:

   Contact Email Address:




   2.    Reference Entity Name:

   Reference Contact Name:

   Contact Telephone Number:

   Contact Email Address:




   3.    Reference Entity Name:

   Reference Contact Name:

   Contact Telephone Number:

   Contact Email Address:




C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                           Page   10
                                   RFP ATTACHMENT C —- SAMPLE CONTRACT

                            STATE OF OREGON            PERSONAL/PROFESSIONAL                  SERVICES CONTRACT
                                                         Number:
                                                                    Title:

This Contract (“Contract”) is between the State of Oregon, acting by and through its Oregon Business
Development Department (“OBDD”’), and                                                    (“Contractor’’).
   1.   Effective Date and Duration. This Contract is effective once fully executed, and approved as
required by applicable law. Unless terminated earlier, this Contract terminates when OBDD accepts
Contractor’s performance or on                      whichever date occurs first. Termination does not
extinguish or prejudice OBDD’s right to enforce this Contract with respect to any breach of a Contractor
warranty or any default or defect in Contractor performance that has not been cured.
    2.      Statement of Work. The Statement of Work (the “Services’’), including the delivery schedule for
such Services, 1s contained in Exhibit A.
   3.    Compensation. The maximum payable to Contractor under this Contract, which includes any
allowable expenses, is $                  . Subject to the terms and conditions of this Contract, OBDD
shall pay Contractor for Services rendered under this Contract as described in Exhibit A.
    4.      Contract          Documents.        This    Contract     consists     of the following          documents,    incorporated by
reference, which are listed in descending order of precedence:                               this Contract less all exhibits, attached
Exhibit A and Exhibit B.
    5.      Independent Contractor; Responsibility for Taxes and Withholding
    a.      Contractor will perform all required Services as an independent contractor. Although OBDD
reserves the right (1) to determine the delivery schedule for the Services to be performed and (11) to evaluate
the quality of the completed                    performance,       OBDD         cannot     and will not control,         and Contractor   is
responsible for determining, the means and manner of Contractor’s performance.
   b.   If Contractor is currently performing services for the State of Oregon or the federal government,
Contractor by signature to this Contract declares and certifies that: Contractor’s Services to be performed
under this Contract create no potential or actual conflict of interest as defined by ORS 244, and no rules
or regulations of Contractor’s employing agency (state or federal) prohibit Contractor’s Services under
this Contract. Contractor is not an “officer,” “employee,” or “agent” of OBDD, as those terms are used in
ORS 30.265.
    c.      Contractor is responsible for all federal or state taxes applicable to compensation or payments paid
to Contractor           under      this Contract,      and unless     OBDD        is aware     that Contractor     is subject to backup
withholding, OBDD will not withhold from such compensation or payments any amount(s) to cover
Contractor’s federal or state tax obligations. Contractor is not eligible for any social security,
unemployment insurance or workers’ compensation benefits from compensation or payments paid to
Contractor under this Contract, except as a self-employed individual.
    6.      Subcontracts and Assignment; Successors and Assigns
   a.    Except as described in Exhibit A, Contractor may not enter into any subcontracts for any of the
Services required by this Contract, or assign or transfer any of its interest in this Contract, without OBDD’s
prior written consent. In addition to any other provisions OBDD may require, Contractor will include in
any permitted subcontract under this Contract a requirement that the subcontractor be bound by Sections
5, 6, 10, 11, 14, 15, and 18 of this Contract as if the subcontractor were the Contractor. OBDD’s consent


C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                                                      Page   11
to any subcontract, assignment or transfer does not relieve Contractor of any of its duties or obligations
under this Contract. Any subcontractor, assignee or transferee is considered Contractor’s agent.
   b.   The provisions of this Contract are binding upon and will inure to the benefit of the parties hereto,
and their respective successors and permitted assigns, if any.
   7.   No Third Party Beneficiaries. OBDD and Contractor are the only parties to this Contract and are
the only parties entitled to enforce its terms. Nothing in this Contract gives, or is to be construed to give
any benefit or right, whether directly, indirectly or otherwise, to third persons unless such third persons
are individually identified by name and expressly described as intended beneficiaries of the terms of this
Contract.
    8.      Funds Available and Authorized; Payments
   a.   No other agency or department of the State of Oregon will compensate Contractor for Services
performed under this Contract. OBDD has sufficient funds currently available and authorized for
expenditure to finance the costs of this Contract within OBDD’s biennial appropriation or limitation.
Contractor understands and agrees that OBDD’s payment of amounts under this Contract attributable to
Services performed after the last day of the current biennium is contingent on OBDD receiving from the
Oregon Legislative Assembly funding, appropriations, limitations, allotments or other expenditure
authority sufficient to allow OBDD, in the exercise of its reasonable administrative discretion, to continue
to make payments under this Contract. Nothing in this Contract is to be construed as permitting any
violation of Article XI, section 7 of the Oregon Constitution or any other law regulating liabilities or
monetary obligations of the State of Oregon.
   b.       OBDD will only pay for completed Services that are accepted by OBDD.
    9.      Representations and Warranties
   a.    Contractor’s Representations and Warranties. Contractor represents and warrants to OBDD
that (1) Contractor has the power and authority to enter into and perform this Contract, (2) this Contract
is a valid and binding obligation of Contractor enforceable in accordance with its terms, (3) the Services
under this Contract will be performed in accordance with the highest standards prevalent in the industry,
and (4) Contractor will, at all times during the term of this Contract, be qualified, professionally
competent,         and duly licensed to perform the Services, and (5) Contractor (to the best of Contractor’s
knowledge, after due inquiry), for a period of no fewer than six calendar years preceding the effective date
of this Contract, faithfully has complied with (4) all tax laws of this state, including but no limited to ORS
305.620 and ORS chapters 316, 317, and 318; (11) any tax provisions imposed by a political subdivision
of this state that applied to Contractor, to Contractor’s property, operations, receipts, or income, or to
Contractor’s performance of or compensation for any work performed by Contractor; (111) any tax
provisions imposed by a political subdivision of this state that applied to Contractor, to Contractor’s
property, operations, receipts, or income, or to Contractor’s performance of or compensation for any work
performed by Contractor; and (iv) any rules, regulations, charter provisions, or ordinances that
implemented or enforced any of the foregoing tax laws or provision.
    b.      Warranties cumulative. The warranties set forth in this section are in addition to, and not in lieu
of, any other warranties provided.
  10.       Ownership of Work Product
    a.      Definitions. As used in this Section 10, and elsewhere in this Contract, the following terms have
the meanings set forth below:
       (i)  “Contractor Intellectual Property” means any intellectual property owned by Contractor and
developed independently from the Services.

C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                          Page   12
      Gi)  “Third Party Intellectual Property” means any intellectual property owned by parties other
than OBDD or Contractor.
         Git)        “Work Product’ means every invention, discovery, work of authorship, trade secret or other
tangible or intangible item and all Services that Contractor delivers or is required to deliver to OBDD
pursuant to this Contract.
   b.    Ownership and License. All intellectual property rights in the Work Product created by
Contractor pursuant to this Contract, including derivative works and compilations, are the exclusive
property of OBDD. All Work Product authored by Contractor under this Contract is deemed “work made
for hire” to the extent permitted by the United States Copyright Act. To the extent OBDD is not the owner
of the intellectual property rights in such Work Product, Contractor hereby irrevocably assigns to OBDD
any and all of its rights, title, and interest in such Work Product. Upon OBDD’s reasonable request,
Contractor shall execute such further documents and instruments reasonably necessary to fully vest such
rights in OBDD. Contractor forever waives any and all rights relating to original Work Product created
pursuant to this Contract, including without limitation, any and all rights arising under 17 USC §106A or
any other rights of identification of authorship or rights of approval, restriction or limitation on use or
subsequent modifications.
            In the event that intellectual property rights in the Work Product are Contractor Intellectual
Property, Contractor hereby grants to OBDD an irrevocable, non-exclusive, perpetual, royalty-free license
to use, make, reproduce, prepare derivative works based upon, distribute copies of, perform and display
the Contractor Intellectual Property, and to authorize others to do the same on OBDD’s behalf.
         To the extent Contractor has the authority, Contractor will sublicense or pass through to OBDD
all intellectual property rights in the Work Product that are Third Party Intellectual Property. Contractor
represents and warrants that it has provided written disclosure to OBDD of all Third Party Intellectual
Property that must be independently licensed by the OBDD to fully enjoy the benefits of the Work Product.
If Contractor failed to provide such written disclosure, Contractor will secure on OBDD’s behalf and in
the name of OBDD an irrevocable, non-exclusive, perpetual, royalty-free license to use, make, reproduce,
prepare derivative works based upon, distribute copies of, perform and display the Third Party Intellectual
Property employed in the Work Product, and to authorize others to do the same on OBDD’s behalf.
  11.       Indemnity
   a.   Claims for Other than Professional Liability. Contractor will defend (subject to ORS
chapter 180), save and hold harmless the State of Oregon, the Oregon Business Development Commission
and its members,               OBDD,            their officers,   agents   and   employees   from   all claims,   suits or actions   of
whatsoever nature, including intentional acts resulting from or arising out of the activities of Contractor
or its subcontractors, agents or employees under this Contract.
   b.  Claims for Professional Liability. Contractor will defend (subject to ORS chapter 180), save and
hold harmless the State of Oregon, the Oregon Business Development Commission and its members,
OBDD, their officers, agents and employees, from all claims, suits or actions arising out of the professional
negligent acts, errors or omissions of Contractor or its subcontractors, agents or employees in performance
of professional services under this agreement.
    c.   Control of Defense and Settlement. Contractor will have control of the defense and settlement
of any claim that is subject to sections 1 1.a or 11.b; however, neither Contractor nor any attorney engaged
by Contractor will defend the claim in the name of the State of Oregon or any agency of the State of
Oregon, nor purport to act as legal representative of the State of Oregon or any of its agencies, without
first receiving authority to act as legal counsel for the State of Oregon from the Oregon Attorney General,
in a form and manner determined appropriate by the Attorney General, nor will Contractor settle any claim

C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                                                 Page   13
on behalf of the State of Oregon without the approval of the Attorney General. The State of Oregon may,
at its election and expense, assume its own defense and settlement.
  12.        Insurance. Contractor will provide insurance as indicated on Exhibit B.
  13.        Termination
   a.  Parties’ Right to Terminate For Convenience. This Contract may be terminated at any time by
mutual written consent of the parties.
     b.      OBDD’s         Right To Terminate For Convenience.      OBDD    may, at its sole discretion, terminate
this Contract upon 30 days notice to Contractor.
   c.   OBDD’s Right to Terminate For Cause. OBDD may terminate this Contract immediately upon
notice to Contractor, or at such later date as OBDD may establish in such notice, upon the occurrence of
any of the following events:
         (i)   OBDD fails to receive funding, or appropriations, limitations or other expenditure authority
at levels sufficient to pay for Contractor’s Services;
       (ii)   Federal or state laws, regulations or guidelines are modified or interpreted in such a way that
either the Services under this Contract is prohibited or OBDD is prohibited from paying for such Services
from the planned funding source;
          (iii)   | Contractor no longer holds any license or certificate that is required to perform the Services;
or
          (iv)    | Contractor commits any material breach or default of any covenant, warranty, obligation,
certification, or agreement under this Contract, including but not limited to a violation of Section 9a(5) or
a failure to comply with Section 15, fails to perform the Services under this Contract within the time
specified herein or any extension thereof, or so fails to pursue the Services as to endanger Contractor’s
performance under this Contract in accordance with its terms.
   d.   Contractor’s Right to Terminate for Cause. Contractor may terminate this Contract upon
30 days’ notice to OBDD if OBDD fails to pay Contractor pursuant to the terms of this Contract and
OBDD fails to cure within 30 business days after receipt of Contractor’s notice, or such longer period of
cure as Contractor may specify in such notice.
     e.      Remedies

            (i)      Inthe event of termination pursuant to Sections 13a, 13b, 13c(i), 13c(i1) or 13d, Contractor’s
sole remedy is a claim for the sum designated for accomplishing the Services multiplied by the percentage
of Services completed and accepted by OBDD, less previous amounts paid and any claim(s) which State
has against Contractor. If previous amounts paid to Contractor exceed the amount due to Contractor under
this subsection, Contractor will promptly pay any excess to OBDD.
        (i)    In the event of termination pursuant to Section 13c(iui) or 13cGiv), OBDD has any remedy
available to it under this Contract, at law or in equity, including but not limited to monetary damages. If
it is determined for any reason that Contractor was not in default under Section 13c(iii) or 13c(iv), the
rights and obligations of the parties will be the same as if the Contract was terminated pursuant to Section
13b.
    f.  Contractor’s Tender Upon Termination. Upon receiving a notice of termination of this
Contract, Contractor will immediately cease all activities under this Contract, unless OBDD expressly
directs otherwise in such notice. Upon termination of this Contract, Contractor will deliver to OBDD all
documents, information, works-in-progress and other property that are or would be deliverables had the


C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                              Page   14
Contract been completed. Upon OBDD’s request, Contractor will surrender to anyone OBDD designates,
all documents, research or objects or other tangible things needed to complete the Services.
  14.   Records Maintenance; Access. Contractor will maintain all fiscal records relating to this Contract
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. In addition, Contractor will maintain any
other records pertinent to this Contract in such a manner as to clearly document Contractor’s performance.
Contractor acknowledges and agrees that OBDD and the Oregon Secretary of State’s Office and the
federal government and their duly authorized representatives have access to such fiscal records and other
books, documents, papers, plans and writings of Contractor that are pertinent to this Contract to perform
examinations and audits and make excerpts and transcripts. Contractor will retain and keep accessible all
such fiscal records, books, documents, papers, plans, and writings for a minimum of six (6) years, or such
longer period as may be required by applicable law, following final payment and termination of this
Contract, or until the conclusion of any audit, controversy or litigation arising out of or related to this
Contract, whichever date ts later.
15. | Compliance with Applicable Law. Contractor shall comply with all federal, state and local
laws, regulations, executive orders and ordinances applicable to the Services under this Contract.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, Contractor expressly agrees to comply with: (1) Title VI
of Civil Rights Act of 1964; (11) Section V of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973; (411) the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 and ORS 659A.142; (iv) all regulations and administrative rules established
pursuant to the foregoing laws; and (v) all other applicable requirements of federal and state civil rights
and rehabilitation statutes, rules and regulations. OBDD’s performance under this Contract is
conditioned upon Contractor’s compliance with the provisions of ORS 279B.220, 279B.230, 279B.235,
and 279B.270, which are incorporated by this reference. Contractor shall continue to comply with the
tax laws of this state or a political sub-division of this state during the term of the public contract.
  16.   Business Registration. Contractor has provided to the Oregon Department of Revenue and the
Secretary of State Corporation Division all information required by those agencies to do business in the
State of Oregon relative to this Contract.
  17.       Force Majeure. Neither OBDD nor Contractor will be held responsible for delay or default caused
by fire, riot, acts of God, terrorist acts, or other acts of political sabotage, or war where such cause was
beyond the reasonable control of OBDD or Contractor, respectively. Contractor will, however, make all
reasonable efforts to remove or eliminate such a cause of delay or default and will, upon the cessation of the
cause, diligently pursue performance of its obligations under this Contract.
  18.       Survival. All rights and obligations cease upon termination of this Contract, except for the rights
and obligations set forth in Sections 1, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 21, 25, and 26.
  19.       Time is of the Essence. Contractor agrees that time is of the essence under this Contract.
 20.    Notice. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Contract, any notices will be given in
writing by personal delivery, or mailing, postage prepaid, to:
            OBDD:
                                           Oregon Business Development Department
                                           775 Summer Street, Suite 200
                                           Salem, OR   97301-1280
            Contractor:                    According to the Contractor Data and Certification below
        or to such other addresses or numbers as either party may later designate pursuant to this
Section 20. Any notice so addressed and mailed is deemed to be given five (5) days after mailing. Any
notice by personal delivery is deemed to be given when actually delivered.


C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                            Page   15
  21.    Severability. The parties agree that if any term or provision of this Contract is declared by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be illegal or in conflict with any law, the validity of the remaining terms and
provisions are not affected, and the rights and obligations of the parties are to be construed and enforced
as if the Contract did not contain the particular term or provision held to be invalid.
  22.   Counterparts. This Contract may be executed in several counterparts, all of which when taken
together constitute one agreement binding on all parties, notwithstanding that all parties are not signatories
to the same counterpart. Each copy of the Contract so executed constitutes an original.
 23.  Oregon False Claims Act. Contractor acknowledges that the Oregon False Claims Act,
ORS 180.750 to 180.785, applies to this Contract. Contractor certifies the truthfulness, completeness, and
accuracy of any statement or claim it has made, it makes, it may make, or causes to be made that pertains to
this Contract.
 24.    Disclosure of Social Security Number. Contractor must provide Contractor’s Social Security
number unless Contractor provides a federal tax ID number. This number is requested pursuant to ORS
305.385. Social Security numbers provided pursuant to this authority will be used for the administration
of state, federal and local tax laws.
 25.        Choice of Law; Designation of Forum; Federal Forum
    a.      The laws of the State of Oregon (without giving effect to its conflicts of law principles) govern all
matters arising out of or relating to this Contract, including, without limitation, its validity, interpretation,
construction, performance, and enforcement.
   b.    Any party bringing a legal action or proceeding against any other party arising out of or relating
to this Contract shall bring the legal action or proceeding in the Circuit Court of the State of Oregon for
Marion County (unless Oregon law requires that it be brought and conducted in another county). Each
party hereby consents to the exclusive jurisdiction of such court, waives any objection to venue, and
waives any claim that such forum is an inconvenient forum.
   c.    Notwithstanding the preceding paragraph, if a claim must be brought in a federal forum, then it
must be brought and adjudicated solely and exclusively within the United States District Court for the
District of Oregon. This subsection (c) applies to a claim brought against the State of Oregon only to the
extent Congress has appropriately abrogated the State of Oregon’s sovereign immunity and is not consent
by the State of Oregon to be sued in federal court. This subsection (c) is also not a waiver by the State of
Oregon of any form of defense or immunity, including but not limited to sovereign immunity and
immunity based on the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.
  26.   Merger Clause; Waiver. This Contract and the exhibits that are attached hereto and by this
reference incorporated herein constitute the entire agreement between the parties on the subject matter
hereof. There are no understandings, agreements, or representations, oral or written, not specified herein
regarding this Contract. No waiver, consent, modification or change of terms of this Contract binds either
party unless in writing and signed by both parties, and all necessary State approvals have been obtained.
Such waiver, consent, modification or change, if made, is effective only in the specific instance and for
the specific purpose given. The failure of OBDD to enforce any provision of this Contract does not
constitute a waiver by OBDD of that or any other provision.
 27.        Amendments. OBDD may agree to amend this Contract without conducting further solicitation
activities, to the extent provided in the solicitation document, if any, from which this Contract arose, and
to the extent permitted by applicable statutes and administrative rules. No amendment to this Contract is
effective unless it is in writing signed by the parties, and all approvals required by applicable law have
been obtained.


C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                            Page   16
  28.    Attorney Fees and Other Expenses. To the extent permitted by the Oregon Constitution and the
Oregon Tort Claims Act, the prevailing party in any dispute arising from this Contract is entitled to recover
from the other its reasonable attorney fees, costs and expenses at trial and on appeal. Reasonable attorney
fees cannot exceed the rate charged to the State by its attorneys. The Contractor will, on demand, pay to
the State reasonable expenses incurred by the State in the collection of such payments.
  29.    Confidential Information.
    a.   In the course of performing Services under this Contract, Contractor acknowledges that it and its
employees or agents may be exposed to or acquire information that is confidential to OBDD or OBDD’s
clients. Any and all information of any form obtained by Contractor or its employees or agents in the
performance of this Contract shall be deemed to be confidential information of OBDD (“Confidential
Information”). Any reports or other documents or items which result from the use of the Confidential
Information by Contractor shall be treated with respect to confidentiality in the same manner as the
Confidential Information. Confidential Information shall be deemed not to include information that (1) is
or becomes (other than by disclosure by Contractor) publicly known or is contained in a publicly available
document;          (11) is furnished by OBDD               to others without restrictions similar to those imposed by this
Contract; (iii) is rightfully in Contractor’s possession without the obligation of nondisclosure prior to the
time of its disclosure under this Contract; or (iv) is independently developed by employees or agents of
Contractor who can be shown to have had no access to the Confidential Information.
   b.   Standard of Care. Contractor agrees to hold Confidential Information in strict confidence, using
at least the same degree of care that Contractor uses in maintaining the confidentiality of its own
confidential information, and not to copy, reproduce, sell, assign, license, market, transfer or otherwise
dispose of, give, or disclose Confidential Information to third parties or use Confidential Information for
any purposes whatsoever other than the provision of Services to OBDD hereunder, and to advise each of
its employees and agents of their obligations to keep Confidential Information confidential.
    c.  Cooperation. Contractor agrees to comply with all reasonable requests by OBDD to ensure the
confidentiality           and     nondisclosure        of the   Confidential     Information,    including   without   limitation   (4)
obtaining nondisclosure agreements, in a form approved by OBDD, from each of Contractor’s employees
and agents who are performing Services, and providing copies of such agreements to OBDD, and (11)
performing criminal background checks on each of Contractor’s employees and agents who are
performing Services, and providing a copy of the results to OBDD.

                                                    CONTRACTOR    DATA AND CERTIFICATION

Name (tax filing):
Address:
Email:
Telephone:                                                                       Facsimile:
Citizenship, if applicable:                     | Non-resident alien   |_| Yes                | | No
Business Designation (check one):                                      _
|__| Private for-profit, or non-profit Corporation                     |__| Professional Corporation
     Partnership                                                       | _| Limited Partnership
|__| Limited Liability Company                                         |__| Limited Liability Partnership
|__| Sole Proprietorship                                               |__| Other:
Above payment information must be provided prior to Contract approval. This information may be reported to the Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) under the name and taxpayer identification submitted. (See IRS 1099 for additional instructions regarding taxpayer ID numbers.)
Information not matching IRS records could subject Contractor to 31 percent backup withholding.

Certified Firms. ORS 200.090 requires all public agencies to “aggressively pursue a policy of providing opportunities for
disadvantaged business enterprises, minority-owned businesses, woman-owned businesses, service-disabled veteran owned
and emerging small businesses...””, The OBDD encourages Contractor in any contracting activity to follow good faith efforts
as described in ORS 200.045. Additional resources are provided by the Governor’s Policy Advisor for Economic and

C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                                                Page   17
Business Equity. Also, the Certification Office for Business Inclusion and Diversity at the Oregon Business Development
OBDD maintains a list of certified firms and can answer questions. Search for certified COBID firms on the web at:
https://oregon4biz.diversitysoftware.com/FrontEnd/VendorSearchPublic.asp.
CONTRACTOR            DATA AND TAX LAW            CERTIFICATION

The undersigned certifies and swears under penalty of perjury that: I am authorized to act on behalf of Contractor, I have authority and
knowledge regarding Contractor’s payment of taxes, the taxpayer identification number and other information provided on Contractor’s IRS
W-9 form [or for an international vendor: W-8        series form] is correct, Contractor is not subject to tax withholding, and Contractor is not in
violation of any Oregon tax laws, including but not limited to a state tax imposed by ORS 305.380, 320.005 to 320.150 and 403.200 to
403.250    and ORS     chapters   118, 314, 316, 317, 318, 321   and 323 and the elderly rental assistance program under ORS     310.657    and local
taxes administered by the Department of Revenue under ORS 305.620. Contractor shall continue to comply with the tax laws of this state or
a political subdivision of this state during the term of this Contract.

Contractor, by the signature below of its authorized representative, acknowledges that it has read this
Agreement, understands it, and agrees to be bound by its terms and conditions.

   CONTRACTOR:                    NO SERVICES MAY OCCUR PRIOR TO NECESSARY STATE APPROVALS

CONTRACTOR

By:
              Approval Signature                                               Title                                          Date
OBDD

By:
              Approval Signature                                               Title                                          Date
ATTORNEY GENERAL


Approved         as to Legal        Sufficiency    (All Contracts over $150,000, unless exempted)                             Date




C2021507_StrategicPlanningRFP_Final.docx.docx                                                                                              Page   18
                 EXHIBIT A —- STATEMENT                                          OF WORK                              AND               COMPENSATION


                                       INTRODUCTION                                        i: secessary or helpfads


                                                                                                              wa
                                                                                                              Stern       ‘ace   wpeac rentot ce teaet car t
                                    STATEMENT                             OF         W     ORK                irsy
                                                                                                              PRAP          me
                                                                                                                           LIS     8
                                                                                                                                 SSRN   POTTS
                                                                                                                                           ARLE



Contractor shall...


                                                                                               te     3                             *    *    wy
                                              COMPENSATION                                     fis PN
                                                                                               PYey
                                                                                                   be Teekay
                                                                                                      NSO VALEort |t
             e     ry          oN         x      1                  ay           *                *       *           ~
                   PWN aba aesten as   pobwato       ven          woah   weixy       Pee    eee       wear
Compensation.      PISESEPES
                   8
                                       War
                                         ryYys
                                                     We
                                                     MEPER
                                                             WHEaay DaY
                                                             VR       TANS
                                                                           POY
                                                                           VEN
                                                                                            ST
                                                                                            CRWS EN
                                                                                                    Wher)
                                                                                                    UA eA




Invoices and Payments. Invoices must include the OBDD contract number, a description of
services provided and the dates of service. Contractor will submit invoices requesting payment to
OBDD’s Contract Administrator for approval. OBDD’s Contract Administrator is:
        Coartract Adrrarisiratar
        Oregon Business Development Department
        775 Summer Street, Suite 200
        Salem, Oregon 97301-1280
        email a¢iiresseiiad adcivess (503) prose suas
or as may be otherwise designated through written notice. Contractor may not submit invoices any
more frequently than once per month. OBDD reserves the right to request, in writing, full
itemization and receipts for any or all labor and direct costs billed by the Contractor and such other
items of costs as the OBDD requests. Contractor will provide receipts to OBDD within five (5)
business days of OBDD’s request. OBDD will not make payment to Contractor under the
applicable invoice until OBDD has received all requested receipts from the Contractor. Any
overdue payments by OBDD for an approved invoice are subject to ORS 293.462.
Corrective Work. Contractor is responsible to complete all Services, including deliverables, as
defined in the Statement of Work to the satisfaction of OBDD.                                                                                If OBDD,          in its sole discretion,
determines that the Services are unacceptable, Contractor is responsible to correct any deficiencies
in the Services to OBDD’s satisfaction without further compensation. OBDD may withhold other
payments until any deficiencies have been corrected to OBDD’s satisfaction.
Travel and Expenses. {is bs negetiates!! in no case may it exceed state per diem rates.
                                     EXHIBIT B - INSURANCE
During the term of this Contract, Contractor will maintain in force at its own expense, each insurance noted
below or the equivalent insurance for a company in Germany.
       (OBDD must check boxes for #2, #3, & #4 as to whether insurance is required or not.)
   1. XJ Required by OBDD of contractors with one or more workers, as defined by ORS 656.027.
      All employers, including Contractor, that employ subject workers, as defined in ORS 656.027, will
      comply with ORS 656.017 and will provide workers’ compensation insurance coverage for those
      workers, unless they meet the requirement for an exemption under ORS 656.126(2). Contractor will
      require and ensure that each of its subcontractors complies with these requirements.
  2. L] Required by OBDD                          XX] Not required by OBDD
      Professional Liability insurance with a combined      single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
      L_] $200,000, [_] $500,000, L_] $1,000,000, or |_] $2,000,000 each claim, incident or occurrence This
      is to cover damages caused by error, omission or negligent acts related to the professional services to
      be provided under this Contract.
  3. XX] Required by OBDD                         L_] Not required by OBDD
      General Liability insurance with a combined       single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than [|
      $200,000,
      DX] $500,000, [_] $1,000,000, or L_] $2,000,000 each occurrence for Bodily Injury and Property
      Damage. It will include contractual liability coverage for the indemnity provided under this Contract.
      The policy will be endorsed to name State of Oregon, the Oregon Business Development Department,
      its officers and employees as Additional Insureds but only with respect to the Contractor’s
      commercial services to be provided under this Contract.
  4. XX] Required by OBDD                         _] Not required by OBDD
      Automobile Liability Contractor will obtain, at Contractor’s expense, and keep in effect during the
      term of this Contract, Commercial Business Automobile Liability Insurance covering all owned, non-
      owned, or hired vehicles. This coverage may be written in combination with the Commercial General
      Liability Insurance (with separate limits). Combined single limit per occurrence cannot be less than
      [_] Oregon Financial Responsibility Law (ORS 806.060), [_] $200,000, Bx] $500,000, or [_]
      $1,000,000, each accident for Bodily Injury and Property Damage, including coverage for owned,
      hired or non-owned vehicles, as applicable. The policy will be endorsed to name the State of Oregon,
      the Oregon Business Development Department, its officers and employees as Additional Insureds
      but only with respect to the Contractor’s commercial services to be provided under this Contract.
   5. Notice of cancellation or change. There will be no cancellation, material change, reduction of limits
      or intent not to renew the insurance coverage(s) without 30 days prior written notice from the
      Contractor or its insurer(s) to OBDD.
  6. Certificates of insurance. As evidence of the insurance coverages required by this Contract, the
     Contractor will furnish acceptable insurance certificates to OBDD prior to commencing the Services.
     The certificate will specify “The State of Oregon, the Oregon Business Development
     Department, its officers and employees” as Additional Insureds for Automobile and General
     Liability. It need not reference a specific Contract name or number. Insuring companies or entities
     are subject to OBDD acceptance. If requested, complete copies of insurance policies, trust
     agreements, etc. will be provided to OBDD. The Contractor is financially responsible for all pertinent
      deductibles, self-insured retentions and/or self-insurance.
