Name of Policy: Nondiscrimination

Policy Number: 3364 -50-02

Approving Officer: President
                                                      Effective date: December 21, 2022
Responsible Agent: Equal Opportunity
Coordinator                                           Original effective date: December 1, 2007

Scope: All University of Toledo Campuses


        New policy proposal                         Minor/technical revision of existing policy


        Major revision of existing policy           Reaffirmation of existing policy



(A)    Policy statement

The University of Toledo does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, age,
national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, military or veteran
status, the presence of a disability, genetic information, familial status, political affiliation, or
participation in protected activities in its provision of employment and educational opportunities.

Discrimination, including discriminatory harassment, on any of those bases is strictly prohibited.
Upon notice of possible discrimination, the University takes prompt and appropriate steps to
determine what occurred, end a discriminatory practice or hostile environment if one has been
created, and prevent its recurrence. Retaliation against anyone because he or she has made a
complaint or served as a witness or otherwise engaged in activity protected by this policy is also
strictly prohibited by this policy.

The University encourages anyone who believes he or she has been subjected to conduct in
violation of this policy to file a complaint under this policy to ensure that the University has an
opportunity to address prohibited conduct.

(B)    Purpose

Through this and related policies, the University acknowledges and complies with its duties
under Titles VI and VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education Amendments
of 1972, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, the Age Discrimination Act of
1975, Sections 503 and 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and the Americans with
3364-50-02 Non Discrimination                                                                            2


Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended, as well as relevant state and local laws, by setting forth
comprehensive frameworks for receiving, processing, investigating, and resolving complaints.

This policy also provides the University community with necessary information regarding how
to make complaints of alleged violations of this policy and what to expect from the investigation
and resolution process.

(C)     Scope

This policy applies to all faculty, staff, students, student organizations, and third parties (for
example, vendors and visitors), and covers conduct that occurs in University programs and
activities, on University property or at University sponsored events.

This policy addresses the reporting and processing of complaints alleging discrimination,
including discriminatory harassment, based on race, color, religion, age, national origin,
ancestry, military or veteran status, genetic information, familial status, and political affiliation,
as well as complaints alleging retaliation for participation in activities protected under this
policy.

Sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, and discrimination or harassment based
on sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression is also prohibited. However, the
reporting and processing of complaints alleging sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual
violence or other sexual misconduct (including such misconduct based on sexual orientation,
gender identity, or gender expression) are addressed in a separate policy (3364-50-01), as are
complaints alleging retaliation for participation in activities protected under that policy.

Discrimination or harassment based on disability is also prohibited. However, the reporting and
processing of complaints alleging discrimination and discriminatory harassment based on
disability are addressed in a separate policy (3364-50-03), as are complaints alleging retaliation
for participation in activities protected under that policy.

The reporting and processing of complaints alleging discrimination, discriminatory harassment,
or retaliation on multiple bases covered by two or more of these policies shall be handled under
the Title IX policy (3364-50-01) if one of the bases alleged is covered by the Title IX policy, and
under this policy if none of the bases alleged is covered by the Title IX policy.

This policy should not be interpreted to impinge upon any constitutionally protected rights or
privileges, and will not be used to impose discipline for speech that is protected by the First
Amendment.

(D)     Definitions

Complainant: The individual alleged to have experienced discrimination, harassment, or
retaliation in violation of this policy. In certain circumstances, the University may assume the
role of the complainant.
3364-50-02 Non Discrimination                                                                           3


Days: Calendar days.

Discrimination: Negative or adverse treatment based on race, color, religion, age, national
origin, ancestry, military or veteran status, genetic information, familial status, or political
affiliation. (Sex discrimination, sexual harassment, and sexual violence, or other sexual
misconduct, is discrimination but is addressed instead under the University’s Title IX policy
(3364-50-01).)

Harassment: Physical, verbal, or non-verbal conduct of an offensive, intimidating or threatening
nature based on an individual’s race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, ancestry, sexual
orientation, gender identity and expression, military or veteran status, genetic information,
familial status, or political affiliation that is sufficiently serious to deny or limit the individual’s
ability to participate in the University’s educational program or working environment.
Harassment is a form of discrimination. (Unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature is addressed
instead under the University’s Title IX policy (3364-50-01).)

Respondent: The individual alleged to have engaged in discrimination, harassment or retaliation
in violation of this policy.

Retaliation: Adverse action taken against an individual because the individual has engaged in a
protected activity (such as filing a discrimination complaint or participating in an investigation of
a violation of law or policy). The adverse action can be tangible (such as the giving of a lower
grade or unjustified discipline) or intangible (such as the making of verbal threats).

Sexual misconduct: Sexual misconduct is covered by policy 3364-50-01 and includes sexual
harassment, sexual violence, sexual assault, conduct that exploits another person in a sexual and
non-consensual way (such as voyeurism and non-consensual recording), stalking, dating
violence, domestic violence, and indecent exposure. Sexual misconduct may also be
discrimination, harassment, or violence based on sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender
expression.


(E)         Reporting alleged violations of this policy

      (1)    The Equal Opportunity Coordinator and Deputy Equal Opportunity Coordinators and
             their designees are the only members of the University community who are authorized
             to act upon, investigate, and recommend sanctions or discipline for violations of this
             policy. Other faculty or staff receiving complaints of discrimination prohibited by this
             policy must immediately forward them to the Equal Opportunity Coordinator.

      (2)    Where and how to file a complaint

             Time for filing. Complaints should be reported timely to assure an effective
             investigation unhampered by faded memories or lost evidence, but in any event not
             later than 300 days after the last act of alleged discrimination. Individuals who file
3364-50-02 Non Discrimination                                                                        4


             complaints after this time may request a waiver, in writing, to the Equal Opportunity
             Coordinator, setting forth the reason the complaint was not filed earlier.

             Where to file. A complaint can be made by completing a Complaint Form available on
             the University’s website at . The completed form also may be hand delivered, faxed,
             emailed, or mailed to the Equal Opportunity Coordinator or any Equal Opportunity
             Deputy Coordinator.

             Anonymous complaints. Anonymous complaints may be made to the toll-free
             Compliance Concepts hotline at 1-888-416-1308.

      (3)    Confidentiality

             The University respects the privacy of the parties in responding to reports and
             complaints of discrimination and harassment, and shares information only on a limited,
             “need to know” basis, in accordance with federal and state privacy laws and the Ohio
             Public Records Act. Absolute confidentiality cannot be guaranteed, however.

(F)         Interim measures

Appropriate interim measures coordinated by the Equal Opportunity Coordinator or Deputy
Equal Opportunity Coordinators may be available to a complainant who makes a report of
alleged discrimination. Interim measures for students may include no-contact orders, changes to
academic and living situations as appropriate, counseling, or other actions. Interim measures for
employees may include no-contact orders, reassignment, leave, modification to the place or
manner of performing one’s position, or other actions. The University administers interim
measures in a manner that minimizes the burden on the complainant, while taking into account
due process considerations with regard to the respondent and others, as appropriate.

Respondents or others who participate in the investigation of a complaint may contact the Equal
Opportunity Coordinator if they need assistance prior to the completion of the investigation or
resolution procedures.

(G)         Investigation procedures

       (1)     The Equal Opportunity Coordinator will expeditiously, and in no event later than 7
               days after receiving a report of alleged discrimination, assign the case to an
               appropriate Deputy Equal Opportunity Coordinator for investigation. The Equal
               Opportunity Coordinator will document this step of the process in writing.

       (2)     Within 7 days of receiving the case assignment, the Deputy Equal Opportunity
               Coordinator or designee will contact the complainant and respondent to schedule in-
               person or telephonic interviews. University-provided email will be the primary
               means of communication used, and complainants and respondents are advised to
               check their University-provided email regularly.
3364-50-02 Non Discrimination                                                                         5


           (a)   As part of the investigation, the Deputy Equal Opportunity Coordinator and/or
                 designee will interview witnesses and review available evidence, as appropriate.
                 The parties have an equal opportunity to present witnesses and evidence during
                 the investigation and resolution processes.

           (b)   The investigation generally will be concluded within 45 days after the complaint
                 was received by the Deputy Equal Opportunity Coordinator or designee. This
                 timeframe may be extended if circumstances warrant, such as during school
                 breaks. The Deputy Equal Opportunity Coordinator or designee will notify the
                 parties of any delays and the reasons for the delays.

           (c)   Complainants, respondents or witnesses may bring one non-attorney of their
                 choice to their investigatory interviews. Advisors may be present during
                 investigatory interviews but may not speak, interrupt, or participate in the
                 process, and will be asked to leave if they fail to comply. A bargaining unit
                 representative will be permitted to attend and to participate in an interview of a
                 bargaining unit member that may lead to disciplinary action if the bargaining
                 unit member requests. Advisors are expected to make themselves available
                 when meetings are scheduled; meetings will not be rescheduled due to the
                 unavailability of anyone’s advisor. The parties and their advisors are not
                 permitted to record, photograph, or audio record meetings or proceedings.

           (d) At the investigation’s conclusion, the Deputy Equal Opportunity Coordinator or
               designee will prepare a concise, written investigatory report that summarizes the
               factual findings, and will share the report with the Equal Opportunity
               Coordinator and relevant University administrators.

           (e)   The University uses the preponderance of the evidence or “more likely than
                 not” standard in the investigation and resolution of complaints under this policy.

           (f)   The Deputy Equal Opportunity Coordinator and/or designee will inform the
                 complainant and the respondent in writing of the results of the investigation.

(H)    Resolution

      (1) If the Equal Opportunity Coordinator and Deputy Equal Opportunity Coordinator
          and/or designee conclude after investigation there is no reasonable cause to believe
          any University policy has been violated, the investigation ends.

      (2) If the Equal Opportunity Coordinator and Deputy Equal Opportunity Coordinator
          and/or designee conclude after investigation that there is reasonable cause to believe a
          University policy has been violated, the case will be referred for further action as
          described below.
3364-50-02 Non Discrimination                                                                       6


            (a)   Where the respondent is a student, the matter will be referred to the Student
                  Conduct Officer for appropriate corrective action or disciplinary proceedings
                  under the Student Code of Conduct, Policy 3364-30-04.

            (b)   Where the respondent is an employee covered by a collective bargaining
                  agreement, the matter will be referred to the Human Resources for appropriate
                  corrective action or disciplinary proceedings under the applicable collective
                  bargaining agreement.

            (c)   Where the respondent is an employee not covered by a collective bargaining
                  agreement, the matter will be referred to the Human Resources and the
                  administrator with authority over the respondent for appropriate corrective
                  action or disciplinary proceedings under the applicable policy.

            (d)   Where the respondent is not a University student or employee, the Equal
                  Opportunity Coordinator will determine the appropriate remedial actions.

      (3)   The investigation and resolution of the complaint generally will be completed within
            60 days, absent extenuating circumstances. The Deputy Equal Opportunity
            Coordinator or designee will provide the parties with updates regarding the status of
            the case at regular intervals.

      (4)   This policy provides for the prompt, reliable, impartial investigation and resolution of
            discrimination complaints. Any concerns regarding possible conflicts of interest of
            anyone in the process should immediately be brought to the attention of the Equal
            Opportunity Coordinator or one of the Deputy Equal Opportunity Coordinators not
            involved in the investigation.

(I)    Sanctions and remedies

The sanctions and remedies that may be imposed or available depend on the nature of the party’s
relationship to the University. Students found responsible for discrimination can be subject to
discipline as explained in the Student Code of Conduct, ranging from written assignments up to
and including expulsion. Employees found to have committed discrimination can be subject to
discipline as explained in the applicable collective bargaining agreement or University policy,
ranging from an oral or written reprimand up to and including termination.

The University provides remedies to individuals who experience discrimination and to the
campus community, as appropriate. Remedies may include educational programming, changes to
policies and procedures, counseling, and opportunities to change educational, work, or living
situations.
3364-50-02 Non Discrimination                                                                   7



(J)    Appeals

Any appeal rights and grounds for appeal shall be governed by the Student Code of Conduct
policy for students, the Corrective Action policy for non-bargaining unit employees, and the
applicable collective bargaining agreement for bargaining unit employees.




Approved by:                                   Policies Superseded by This Policy:
                                               • Previous 3364-50-01 Sexual harassment and
                                                   other forms of harassment, most recently
/s/____________________________                    revised effective February 6, 2014
Gregory C. Postel, M.D.                        • And any other policies whose definitions,
President                                          procedures, or other provisions conflict with
                                                   this policy.

February 8, 2024________________               Initial effective date: December 1, 2007
Date
                                               Review/Revision Date: December 21, 2022
Review/Revision Completed by:                  February 8, 2024 updated name of Associate
                                               Director, Institutional Equity and HR Compliance
Chief Human Resources Officer,                 to Jennifer Ray in the policy appendix
Senior Leadership Team                         May 22, 2025 updated name of Associate Director,
                                               HR Compliance to Jennifer Burton and updated
                                               name of the individual responsible for handling
                                               inquires and report concerning the Americans
                                               with Disabilities Act and the Rehabilitation Act to
                                               Kurtis Soltman, ADA Compliance Officer in the
                                               policy appendix

                                               Next review date: December 21, 2025
3364-50-02 Non Discrimination                                                                         8




                                            APPENDIX

The University has designated the following individual to handle inquiries and reports
concerning Titles VI and VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, The Age Discrimination Act of
1975, and Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, which prohibit discrimination on the
basis of race, color, religion, age, sex (including gender identity or expression), and national
origin:

       Jennifer Burton, Associate Director, HR Compliance
       Acting Equal Opportunity Coordinator
       Center for Administrative Support
       Phone: (419) 530-2508
       Email: Jennifer.Schira@utoledo.edu
       Mail Stop: 205

The Equal Opportunity Coordinator is assisted by a Deputy Equal Opportunity Coordinator. The
Deputy Equal Opportunity/Title IX Coordinators investigate allegations of discrimination under
this policy, assist individuals who may require interim measures following a report of alleged
discrimination, and provide information and resources to the campus community.

The University has designated the following individual to handle inquiries and reports
concerning the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Rehabilitation Act, which prohibit
discrimination on the basis of disability and provide for reasonable accommodation:

       Kurtis Soltman, ADA Compliance Officer
       Rocket Hall, Room 1820
       Office Phone: 419-530-4981
       Office Fax: 419-530-6137
       Email: Kurtis.Soltman@utoledo.edu
       Mail Stop: 342

Inquiries regarding race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability, and age discrimination
also may be directed to:

       Denver Office
       Office for Civil Rights
       U.S. Department of Education
       Cesar E. Chavez Memorial Building
       1244 Speer Boulevard, Suite 310
       Denver, CO 80204-3582
       Telephone: 303-844-5695
       FAX: 303-844-4303; TDD: 800-877-8339
       Email: OCR.Denver@ed.gov
