                                                                                                     Linu Parappilly
                                                                                                         TS Director


                                                                                     Technology Services
                                                                             121 Library Court   Oregon City, OR   97045

Board of County Commissioners
Clackamas County

Members of the Board:

   Approval of a Service Level Agreement with the West Linn—Wilsonville School District
  for new dark fiber connections. Total value is $265,500 for 10 years. Funding is through
        West Linn-Wilsonville School District. No County General Funds are involved.

   Purpose/Outcomes             Clackamas Broadband eXchange (CBX) is seeking approval for a new
                                Service Level Agreement (SLA) with the West Linn — Wilsonville School
                                District for dark fiber connections to the new Athey Creek Middle
                                School located in West Linn.
   Dollar Amount and            Total contract value: $265,500.00. No County general Funds will be
   Fiscal Impact                utilized.
   Funding Source               Funding provided by the CBX fund and then reimbursed by the West
                                Linn — Wilsonville School District.
   Duration                     Contract is an automatically renewing 1 year contract that shall not
                                exceed a total of ten (10) years.
  Previous    Board             The Board approved a similar SLA with the West Linn — Wilsonville
  Action                        School District for dark fiber connections on January 30, 2020.
  Strategic Plan                Direct support for County and Technology Service initiatives for:
  Alignment                      -     Build a strong infrastructure
                                 -     Build public trust through good government
   Counsel    Review            October 13, 2022
                               Andrew Naylor
  Procurement                  Was this project processed through Procurement? Since this item is a
  Review                       SLA, no review required from Procurement.
  Contact Person               Duke Dexter, IS Project Coordinator, 503-722-6663
  Contract No.

Background:
The West Linn — Wilsonville School District is in the process of building a new middle school in
West Linn. The school district has selected CBX to be the communications provider for this new
school as well as for their entire school district. CBX has the knowledge and resources to
complete this project and meet the deadlines of the construction schedule.

Recommendation:
Staff respectfully recommends that the Board approve this Service Level Agreement with the
West Linn — Wilsonville School District for dark fiber connections.

Siqcerely,



Linu Parappilly,
TS Director


                       Phone   503.655.8322   |   Fax   503.655.8255   |   www.clackamas.us
                                Clackamas           County
                     FIBER OPTIC SERVICE LEVEL AGREEMENT
                         West Linn —- Wilsonville School District
                                        (Customer Name}


   Recitals

   WHEREAS, Clackamas County (County) desires to provide to West Linn-Wilsonville
   School District (Customer) the services set forth in this Agreement (the “Services’),
   between the specified Customer sites listed in Appendix A, and at the price
   contained     in Appendix A; and

   WHEREAS,        Customer desires to use the Services; and

   WHEREAS , the Parties desire to set forth herein their respective rights and obligations
   with respect to the provision of Services,

   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, and the mutual covenants and
   promises set forth herein, intending to be legally bound, the Parties agree as follows.

   Fiber Optic Network Description

   County will provide Customer with point-to-point single mode fiber optic network
   connectivity, including a termination panel for the fiber optic cables, at each Customer
   site on a path designated by the County.

   Service     Description

   services provided to Customer by County are physical connectivity of one (or more)
   strands of optical fiber (“Fiber”), between sites specifically identified in Appendix A for
   the exclusive use of the Customer’s internal communication needs. Each site listed
   in Appendix A will have a single mode fiber termination. The Fiber is and shall remain
   property of the County.

   Construction and Installation Requirements

   a.   County, when installing Fiber on the property of Customer, shall do so in a neat
        and professional manner. Routing and location of these cables shall be mutually
        agreed   upon between the parties.

   b.   Customer shall secure any easements, leases, permits or other agreements
        necessary to allow County to use existing pathways to, into and within each site to
        the demarcation point for service. Customer shall provide a path for the Fiber from
        the point of entry into the site to the termination panel that complies with all
        applicable building, electrical, fire and related codes.

   c.   Subject to the terms of this Agreement,      and at no cost to County, Customer shall

Fiber Optic Service Level Agreement                                               Page 1 of 9
         provide    adequate      environmentally        controlled      space      and    electricity    required   for
        _ installation, operation, and maintenance of the Fiber used to provision the service
          within each site.

   d.    Customer shall provide a clean, secure, relatively dry and cool location (consistent
         with environmental requirements for fiber optic network connectivity equipment) at
         each of its sites for necessary equipment, as determined by the County in its sole
         discretion.

   e. Customer will provide or arrange for County and its employees, agents, lessees,
      officers and its authorized vendors, upon reasonable notice, to have ingress and
         egress    into and   out of Customer         properties and        buildings in connection           with the
         provision of Service.

   f.    If the presence of asbestos or other hazardous materials exists or is detected,
         Customer must have such hazardous materials removed                  immediately at
         Customer's expense or notify County to install the applicable portion of the Fiber
         in areas of the site that do not contain hazardous material. Any additional expense
         incurred as a result of encountering hazardous materials, including but not limited
         to any additional equipment that may be required, shall be paid by Customer.

   g.    County has no obligation             to   install,   operate,     or maintain         Customer-provided
         facilities or equipment.

   h.    County shall construct Fiber into each Customer building enumerated herein;
         splice fiber into existing County fiber optic resources; terminate County’s optical
         fiber in each Customer building; test and certify appropriate Fiber performance at
         each Customer location; and provide the appropriate fiber patch panel (“hand-
         off’s”) at each location for Customer utilization. Test results for physical connection
         will be made available to Customer upon request.

   Term      of Agreement

   This Agreement is effective upon execution by both parties.                            At such time as County
   completes       installation    and   connection      of the    necessary        facilities and       equipment   to
   provide service herein, County shall then certify and notify Customer in writing that the
   service     is available for use.      Unless     terminated         as herein     provided,     this Agreement
   shall continue for a period of one (1) year and shall automatically renew for successive
   one-year renewal terms, at the County's then-current rate schedule, unless either
   party terminates the Agreement pursuant to the terms herein. Provided, however, that
   the total Agreement term length, including any renewal, shall not exceed ten (10)
   years.

   Rates

   In return for County           providing   the Services        described       in Appendix        A for the term
   indicated        herein,        Customer           shall       pay       County           both        nonrecurring
   construction/installation charges and recurring                      charges     for Services         described    in
   Appendix A, as amended from time to time.


Fiber Optic Service Level Agreement                                                                       Page 2 of 9
   Payment

   a. Payments for Nonrecurring Charges

   For payment of nonrecurring charges described in Appendix A, County shall provide
   an invoice after completion of the construction and installation of the Fiber. Customer
   shall pay the invoice for the nonrecurring charges within thirty (30) days of receipt of
   the invoice. Interest charges shall be assessed for late payments in accordance with
   Appendix A. Failure of Customer to pay within thirty (30) days of receipt of an invoice
   shall constitute an event of default and County may pursue any remedies provided in
   this Agreement including, but not limited to, terminating the Agreement upon
   appropriate advance written notice to Customer.

   b.   Annual Payments for Recurring Charges

   County shail provide an invoice for twelve months of service (July 1 through June
   30), or prorated weekly for any portion thereof, to Customer at the beginning of the
   service period. The annual charge shall be payable within thirty (30) days of receipt
   of invoice. Interest charges shall be assessed for late payments in accordance with
   Appendix A.   If the Customer fails to pay within sixty (60) days of receipt of an
   invoice it shall constitute grounds for County to disconnect the affected Service upon
   thirty (30) days written notice to Customer.

   Recurring charges may be subject to annual increase, as set forth in Appendix A.

   Fiber Maintenance

   County shall maintain the structural aspects of the Fiber in good operating condition,
   utilizing commercially reasonable practices in accordance with Appendix B,
   throughout the Agreement Term. In the event the Fiber fails at any time to meet the
   specifications outlined in Appendix C, County shall endeavor to restore the Fiber to
   meet the specification standards in as timely and expedited a manner as reasonably
   possible.

   County may subcontract for testing, maintenance, repair, restoration, relocation, or
   other operational and technical services it is obligated to provide hereunder.

   Customer shall promptly notify County of any matters pertaining to any damage or
   impending damage to or loss of the use of the Fiber that are known to it and that could
   reasonably be expected to adversely affect the Fiber. County shall promptly notify
   Customer of any matters pertaining to any damage or impending damage to or loss
   of the Fiber that are known to it and that could reasonably be expected to adversely
   affect the Fiber and/or Customer's use thereof.

   Confidentiality

   All Customer data, voice, or video transmission using County Fiber shall be treated by
   County as confidential information, to the extent allowable by law. Customer expressly


Fiber Optic Service Level Agreement                                              Page 3 of 9
         acknowledges and agrees that County’s confidentiality obligations under this
         Agreement are subject to, and only enforceable to the extent permitted by, the Oregon
         Public Records Law, Oregon Revised Statutes (“ORS”) Chapter 192 et. seg., and any
         other applicable state or federal law

10.      Content Control and Privacy

         Customer shall have full and complete control of, and responsibility and liability for,
         the content of any and all communications transmissions sent or received using the
         Fiber.

11.      Assignment and Successors

         Either party may assign this Agreement upon prior written consent of the other party.
         Such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. Upon such assignment, all rights
         and obligations of County and Customer under this Agreement shall pass in total
         without modification to any successor(s) regardless of the manner in which the
         succession may occur.

12.      Damage

         County shail be responsible for restoring, or otherwise repairing to its prior condition,
         any portion of the Customer's premises or facilities, which are damaged by the
         negligent acts or omissions of County. Customer shall be responsible for restoring,
         or otherwise        repairing    to     its    prior   condition,    any   portion   of County’s   connectivity
         equipment or other facilities, located at Customer premises, which are damaged                                 by
         Customer or its agents.

         Customer will reimburse all related Costs associated with damage to the Fiber caused
         by the negligent acts or omissions of Customer, its affiliates, employees, agents,
         contractors or customers. As used herein, “Costs” includes the following: (a) labor
         costs, including wages, salaries, and benefits together with overhead allocable to such
         labor costs; and (b) other direct costs and out-of-pocket expenses on a pass-through
         basis (such as equipment, materials, supplies, contract services, sales, use or similar
         taxes, etc.).

13.      Force     Majeure

         Neither    party     hereto     shall     be     deemed      to be    in default     of any   provision   of this
         Agreement,      for any failure in performance                 resulting from acts or events beyond           the
         reasonable control of such party.                      For purposes of this Agreement,         such acts shail
         include, but       shall   not be limited to, acts of nature, civil or military authority, civil
         disturbance,       war,    strikes, fires, power failure, other catastrophes or other force
         majeure events beyond the parties' reasonable control, provided however that the
         provisions of this paragraph and article shall not preciude Customer from cancelling
         or terminating this Agreement as otherwise permitted hereunder, regardless of any
         force majeure event occurring to County.

14.      Consequential          Damages



      Fiber Optic Service Level Agreement                                                                    Page 4 of 9
         NOTWITHSTANDING     ANY  PROVISION    OF   THIS   AGREMENT  TO  THE
         CONTRARY, IN NO EVENT SHALL EITHER PARTY BE LIABLE TO THE OTHER
         PARTY FOR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, OR
         PUNITIVE DAMAGES, WHETHER FORESEEABLE OR NOT, ARISING OUT OF, OR
         INCONNECTION WITH, TRANSMISSION INTERRUPTIONS OR DEGRADATION,
         INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO DAMAGE OR LOSS OF PROFITS OR
         EQUIPMENT, LOSS OF PROFITS OR REVENUE, COST OF CAPITAL, COST OF
         REPLACEMENT     SERVICES  OR   CLAIMS    OF    CUSTOMERS,  WHETHER
         OCCASIONED BY ANY REPAIR OR MAINTENANCE PERFORMED BY OR FAILED
         TO BE PERFORMED BY A PARTY, OR ANY OTHER CAUSE WHATSOEVER,
         INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION BREACH OF CONTRACT, BREACH OF
         WARRANTY, NEGLIGENCE OR STRICT LIABILITY.

15.      Public    Contracting   Provisions

         The provisions of Oregon public contracting law, ORS 279B.020 through 279B.235,
         to the extent applicable, are incorporated herein by this reference.

16.      Non-Appropriation       or Change     in Law

         Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Agreement, the parties hereby agree and
         understand that if County fails to receive expenditure authority sufficient to allow the
         County,    in the exercise   of its reasonable   administrative discretion, to perform   under
         this Agreement, or if federal or state laws, regulations or guidelines are modified or
         interpreted in such a way that County is prohibited from performing under this
         Agreement, the Agreement shall terminate and Customer shall pay County any
         remaining pro rata fees for services due to the date of such termination payable
         pursuant to Section 7 of this Agreement.

17.      Compliance with Laws

         Customer shall comply with all applicable federal, state, county and city laws,
         ordinances and regulations, including regulations of any administrative agency
         thereof, heretofore or hereafter adopted or established, during the entire term of this
         Agreement.

18.      Taxes     and Assessments

         a.     Customer agrees to pay any and all applicable national, federal, state, county and
                local taxes, fees, assessments or surcharges, and all other similar or related
                charges, which are imposed or levied on the Fiber, or because of Customers use
                of the Services under this Agreement (collectively, “Taxes), whether or not the
                Taxes are imposed or levied directly on the Customer, or imposed or levied on the
                County because of or arising out of the use of the Services either by the Customer,
                or its affiliates, or anyone to whom Customer has sold or otherwise granted access
                to the Services. Customer agrees to pay these Taxes in addition to all other fees
              _ and charges as set forth elsewhere in this Agreement.




      Fiber Optic Service Level Agreement                                                 Page 5 of 9
         b.    “Taxes”      include,     but are    not limited to, business        and     occupation,     commercial,
               district,    excise,     franchise   fee,   gross   receipts,    license,      occupational,     privilege,
              ‘ property,     Public     Utility Commission,       right-of-ways,       utility user,   or other similar
               taxes, fees surcharges          and assessments         as may     be levied against Customer,             or
               against County and passed through to Customer.

19.      Termination

         a.    Either party may terminate this Agreement                   for convenience          following 90 days’
               written notice to the other party.

         b.    Pursuant       to   Section    20    of this   Agreement,       either     party   may     terminate     this
               Agreement in the event of default of the Agreement by the other party.                         Neither the
               County nor the Customer shall be deemed to have waived any breach of this
               Agreement by the other party except by an express waiver in writing. An express
               written waiver as to one breach shall not be deemed                      a waiver of any other breach
               not expressly identified, even though the other breach is of the same nature as
               that waived.

         c.    If Customer terminates this Agreement for any reason other than County’s default
               or failure to perform, County shall be entitled to 5% of the remaining contract
               amount for the unexpired term of this Agreement.

20.      Default

         1.     Either of the following events shall constitute a default:

                   a.      Failure to perform or comply with any material obligation or condition of this
                            Agreement; or

                   b.      Failure to pay any sums due under this Agreement.

         2.    Any defaulting party shall have thirty (30) days in which to cure following written
               notice of default by the non-defaulting party.

21.      Remedies

         If this Agreement is terminated by the County due to a breach by the Customer, then
         the County shall have any remedy available to it in law or equity. If this Agreement is
         terminated for any other reason, Customer's sole remedy is reimbursement of the pro
         rata amounts paid to County on the unexpired term of this Agreement, less any setoff
         to which the County is entitled.

22       Amendment

         Any amendments                to this Agreement shall be in writing and shall be signed                      by ail
         parties.

23.      No    recourse       Against the Grantor



      Fiber Optic Service Level Agreement                                                                     Page 6 of 9
         Customer shall have no recourse whatsoever against County or its officials, boards,
         commissions, or employees for any loss, costs, expense, or damage arising out of
         any provision or requirement contained herein, or in the event this Agreement or any
         part thereof is determined to be invalid.

24.      Notice

         Any notice hereunder shall be in writing and shall be delivered by personal service or
         by United States certified or registered mail, with postage prepaid, or by electronic
         mail as follows:

         Notice to the County

         Manager, Clackamas     Broadband eXchange
         Clackamas County Technology Services
         121 Library Court
         Oregon City, Oregon 97045
         ddexter@clackamas.us
         Fax Number (503) 655-8255

         with a copy to

         Chief Information Officer
         Clackamas County Technology Services
         121 Library Court
         Oregon City, Oregon 97045
         cbxinfo@co.clackamas.or.us
         Fax Number: (503) 655-8255

         Notice to the Customer

         IT Director
         West Linn-Wilsonville School District
         22210 SW Stafford Rd
         Tualatin, OR 97062
         503-673-7044

         with a copy to

         ouperintendent
         West Linn-Wilsonville School District
         22210 SW Stafford Rd
         Tualatin, OR 97062
         503-673-7001

         Either Party, by similar written notice, may change the address to which notices shall
         be sent.



      Fiber Optic Service Level Agreement                                           Page 7 of 9
25.      Debt Limitations

         This Agreement Is expressly subject to the debt limitation of Oregon counties set forth
         in Article Xl, Section 10, of the Oregon Constitution, and County’s performance is
         contingent upon funds being appropriated therefore. Any provisions herein which
         would conflict with law are deemed    inoperative to that extent.

26.      No Attorney Fees

         No attorney fees shall be paid for or awarded       to either party in the course of any
         dispute or other recovery under this Agreement.     It is the intent of the parties that each
         shall bear the costs of its own legal counsel.

27.      Governing      Law

         This Agreement shall be governed and construed in accordance with the laws of the
         State of Oregon without regard to principles of conflicts of law. Any claim, action, or
         suit between County and Customer that arises out of or relates to the performance of
         this Agreement shall be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the
         Circuit Court for Clackamas County, for the State of Oregon.        Provided, however, that
         if any such claim, action, or suit must be brought in a federal forum, it shall be brought
         and conducted solely and exclusively within the United States District Court for the
         District of Oregon.

28.      Survival

         All rights and obligations shall cease upon termination or expiration of this Agreement,
         except for the rights and obligations set forth in Sections 9, 12, 14, 21, 23, 25, 26, 27,
         28, and 30, and all other rights and obligations which by their context are intended to
         survive.

29.      Severability

         If any term or provision of this Agreement is declared by a court of competent
         jurisdiction to be illegai or in conflict with any law, the validity of the remaining terms
         and provisions shall not be affected, and the rights and obligations of the parties shall
         be construed and enforced as if the Agreement did not contain the particular term or
         provision held to be invalid.

30.      Whole Contract

         THIS  AGREEMENT   CONSTITUTES   THE  COMPLETE   AND   EXCLUSIVE
         STATEMENT OF THE CONTRACT BETWEEN THE PARTIES RELEVANT TO THE
         PURPOSE DESCRIBED HEREIN AND SUPERSEDES ALL PRIOR AGREEMENTS
         OF PROPOSALS, ORAL OR WRITTEN, AND ALL OTHER COMMUNICATION
         BETWEEN THE PARTIES RELATING TO THE SUBJECT MATTER OF THIS
         CONTRACT, NO WAIVER, CONSENT, MODIFICATION, OR CHANGE OF TERMS
         OF THIS AGREEMENT WILL BE BINDING ON EITHER PARTY EXCEPT AS A
         WRITTEN ADDENDUM SIGNED BY AUTHORIZED AGENTS OF BOTH PARTIES.


      Fiber Optic Service Level Agreement                                                Page 8 of 9
IN WITNESS WHEREOF,         the parties hereto have executed this Agreement the date and
year first above written.

Clackamas    County

By (signature):

Name:

Title:

Date:

Customer

West Linn — Wilsoralle affect   osc


By (signature):   i          _——_
Name (print): LUCTS NE Son
Title: “WEF TBainordly Nee
Date:             | 1-24-22




     Fiber Optic Service Level Agreement                                      Page 9 of 9
                                                  APPENDIX A

                                    SERVICE AND RATE SCHEDULE

1.          Specified Services and Rates

            The following are the sites, services, and rates agreed to by County and Customer
            at which Customer shall be provided services on the fiber optic network during the
            term of the Agreement. /t is understood by both parties that service to these sites
            shall be provided for the rates below, subject to any rate increases otherwise
            applicable in accordance with terms herein. It is further understood that, during
            the term of the Agreement, Customer may add services to existing or new
            locations, or change services and/or locations, but that such changes are subject
            to the rates for such additional services.

2.          Construction, Installation and Activation

            For construction, installation and activation work and provision of fiber optic
            network components, the County shall charge Customer nonrecurring charge(s)
            as specified in Section 5 of Appendix A. All facilities constructed under this
            Agreement     and     Appendix     A shall    be   owned,    operated,      and     maintained     by the
            County.

3.          Service Changes and Conversions

            Both parties agree that Customer may add or change services during the term of
            the Agreement, but that such changes are subject to applicable rates, and upgrade
            and downgrade charges.

4.          Annual    Recurring Charges


     From                               To
     (Connecting Point A:Site           (Connecting Point B:Site          Service             monn
     Name & Address)                       Name & Address)                                    (5) ate

          West Linn-Wilsonville                            ;                One Pair
     ,    School District               auey    Creek    Miccle School     (two) dark    | $255.00
          22210 SW Stafford Rd          West Linn. OR 97068                  fibers
          Tualatin, OR 97062                                              (Redundant)

          West Linn-Wilsonville         Athey Creek Middle Schoo! | One Pair | $255.00
     2    Sooo Wy atatfor arq        | 840 Dollar st                       (two) dark
          Tualatin, OR   97062          West Linn, OR     97068              fibers




5.          Nonrecurring Charges

     From                             To                                      .               Amount
     (Connecting Point A:Site         (Connecting Point B:Site           Service                 ($)

Appendix A                                                                                              Page    1 of 2
  Name & Address)              Name & Address)
      West Linn-Wilsonville
                               Athey Creek Middle School
      School District
  1                            840 Dollar St                Construction   | $111,000.00
      22210 SW Stafford Rd
                               West Linn, OR   97068
      Tualatin, OR 97062
      West Linn-Wilsonville
                               Athey Creek Middle School
      School District
                               840 Dollar St                Construction | $93,300.00
      22210 SW Stafford Rd
                               West Linn, OR 97068
      Tualatin, OR 97062


       Late Payment Interest

       Customer will be charged interest for any payment made after its due date (thirty
       (30) days after receipt of invoice). Interest is charged at a rate of one and a half
       percent (1.5%) per month, or eighteen percent (18%) annually, on any installment
       not paid when due.

      Annual Consumer         Price Index (CPI) Adjustments

      All fees and minimum charges are subject to Consumer Price Index (CPI)
      adjustments, to be applied annually. The amount of the fees and charges
      specified herein may increase annually by a percentage up to the change                  in the
      West Region (West City Size B/C 2.5 Million or less) Consumer Price Index of
      the US Dept. of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics
      (https://www.bls.gov/regions/west/data/xg-tables/ro9xg01.htm), based upon the rate of
      change as stated from the last month         reported to the same month of the
      preceding year. In the event such Consumer Price Index (or a successor or
      substitute index) is not available, a reliable governmental or other nonpartisan
      publication evaluating the information theretofore used in determining the
      Consumer Price Index shall be used in lieu of such Consumer Price Index.




                        Remainder of this page intentionally left blank.




Appendix A                                                                                 Page 2 of 2
                                                  APPENDIX B

     MAINTENANCE       AND OPERATIONS                     SPECIFICATIONS AND PROCEDURES

1.    Defined Terms

      a.     “Routine Maintenance’ is all preventive maintenance activities and repairs.

      b.     “Non-Routine         Maintenance’            is all efforts and      activities     in response     to an
             emergency circumstance which requires restoration of service.

2.    General

      a.     County shall operate and                 maintain        a Network      Control and Management
             Center    (NCAM)           staffed    twenty-four        (24)   hours    a day,     seven    (7) days    a
             week, by trained and qualified personnel.    County shall maintain (503)
             742-4219 telephone number to contact personnel and NCAM.         County’s
             NCAM personnel shall dispatch maintenance and repair personnel along
             the fiber optic network to repair problems detected through the NCAM’s
             remote surveillance equipment, by the Customer, or otherwise.

      b.     In the event Customer identifies a circumstance which requires restoration
             of   service,       Customer         shall    provide      NCAM         personnel     the    name     and
             address     of the facility with the problem,                   the identification number of the
             Fiber    circuits     in    question,        and   the     name    and     telephone        numbers     of
             Customer’s personnel to contact for site access and status updates.
             NCAM personnel shall immediately contact a County technician and
             provide the Customer contact information. County technician shall contact
             Customer within one (1) hour of initial call.

      Cc.    If the County's technician cannot repair the service interruption by
             telephone, County shall use commercially reasonable efforts to have its
             first maintenance employee or contractor at the site requiring repair within
             five (5) hours of the initial call to the NCAM. County will then work
             continuously until service has been restored.

      d.     County shall use commercially reasonable efforts to notify Customer
             seven (7) days prior to the date of any planned non-emergency
             maintenance activity.     In the event that a County planned activity is
             canceled or delayed for any reason as previously notified, County shall
             notify Customer as soon as reasonably possible and will comply with the
             provisions of the previous sentence to reschedule any delayed activity.

3.    Fiber Optic Network



Appendix B                                                                                               Page 1 of 3
             County shall maintain the fiber optic network in good and operable
             condition and shall repair the fiber in a manner consistent with industry
             standards and using commercially reasonable efforts.
             County shall perform appropriate routine maintenance on the fiber optic
             network in accordance with County's then current preventive maintenance
             procedures.    County’s maintenance procedures shall not substantially
             deviate from industry practice.

      Restoration

      a,     When restoring damaged fiber, the Parties agree to work together to
             restore all traffic as quickly as possible.  County, immediately upon
             arriving on the site of the damage, shall determine the best course of
             action to be taken to restore the fiber and shall begin restoration efforts.

             lt will be the responsibility of County and Customer to report to one
             another respectively any known environmental hazards which would
             restrict or jeopardize any maintenance work activities in shelters or right of
             way areas of operation.

             Upon notification of interruption of fiber optic network service, disrepair,
             impairment or other need for repair or restoration of the fiber and the
             location of the damaged        fiber, County shall pursue commercially
             reasonable efforts to mobilize technicians to achieve necessary repair or
             restoration,  including,  but without     limitation, having   maintenance
             personnel   at the   affected   site within   five   (5) hours   after   receipt   of such
             notice with the required restoration material and equipment.

             In the event that Customer's use of the fiber optic network is interrupted
             due to an occurrence of a force majeure event, repairs and restoration
             shall be made as expeditiously as reasonably possible.          Customer
             recognizes that five (5) hour response time represents optimal conditions,
             and may be impossible to achieve when emergency restoration of fiber
             optic network integrity is required or when responding to certain remote
             locations.   Actual response times will be influenced by such factors as
             terrain, weather conditions present at the time the request is made and
             actual mileage to the fault site.

             For purposes of this section, “commercially reasonable efforts” means
             activities and performances consistent with prudent utility practice, existing
             contract provisions for County technicians and/or employees, practices
             required for preserving the integrity of the fiber optic network, and
             response times that do not jeopardize the health and safety of the
             employees, contractors and agents of County and Customer.

5.    Customer shall be responsible for paying County standard maintenance fees for


Appendix B                                                                                Page 2 of 3
      any calls to County for maintenance issues related to the Fiber that County later
      confirms as resulting from another source other than functionality of the Fibers.




                    Remainder of this page intentionally left blank.




Appendix B                                                                  Page 3 of 3
                                             APPENDIX C

             FIBER SPLICING AND TESTING STANDARDS                   AND PROCEDURES

1.      Fiber and Connector Standards

        a.     Connector Standards
               The loss value of any pigtail connector and any associated fiber jumper or
               pigtail with matching mode field diameters will not exceed .5dB ai 1550 nm.
               The loss value of a connector and its associated jumper with mismatched
               mode field diameters should not exceed .8 dB.

               Field Splice Standards
               The objective for each splice is an averaged loss value of 0.1 dB or less when
               measured bi-directionally with an OTDR at 1550 nm. In the event of damage
               and subsequent restoration of the Fibers, commercially reasonable efforts will
               be made to restore the Fibers to this standard. lf after 3 restoration splicing
               attempts,     County   is not able   to produce   a loss value   of 0.1   dB   or less   bi-
               directionally at 1550 nm, then 0.5 dB or less bi-directionally at 1550 nm will be
               acceptable.     Fibers not meeting the 0.1 dB or less specification will be
               identified as Out Of Specification (OOS).         Documentation of the three
               attempts (re-burns) to bring the OOS fiber within specification will be
               provided.

               Span   Loss
               lt is County's responsibility to insure proper continuity of all fibers at the fiber
               level, not just the pigtail level. Any “frogs” or fibers that cross in the route will
               be remedied by County. The following span loss calculation will be used:

               (A *L) + (0.1 * N) + C = Acceptable Span Loss

               A = Attenuation per KM at 1550 nm
               L = Optical length of cable measured in kilometers (from OTDR Trace)
               N = Number of splices in a span
               C = Connector loss. The connector loss will not exceed .5dB. The section
               test will have (2) pigtail connectors/splices under test, so 1.0dB will be
               aliowed for this loss.




                           Remainder of this page intentionally left blank.




     Appendix C                                                                               Page 1 of 7
