Default Board Post Page - Douglas Education Service District Skip To Main Content Close Menu Search Clear Search About Douglas ESD Board of Directors Contact Us Staff Directory Districts We Serve Facilities Join the Team! Leadership Team News Public Reports What We Do District Support Services Behavioral Health Behavioral Health Coordination Resources School Safety Business Services Communications Electronic Information & Design Human Resources Employee Assistance Program Join our Team! Orange Frog Substitutes Wellness Current Activities Employee Assistance Program Mental Health Physical Health Wellness Resources Volunteers Inter-District Transfers Nursing Print Services School Safety Speech Services Special Education Partner Sports Camp Regional Transition Network Special Education District Support Special Education Evaluation and Support Technology Services Early Learning: Birth - 5 Douglas County EI/ECSE Early Intervention: Ages Birth-3 Early Childhood Special Education: Ages 3-5 Referral Information Local Interagency Coordinator Council Frequently Asked Questions Oregon EI/ECSE Immunization Rates (opens in new window/tab) Parent Resources Jackson County EI/ECSE Our Services Early Intervention: Ages Birth-3 Early Childhood Special Education: Ages 3-5 Referral Information Local Interagency Coordinator Council Frequently Asked Questions Oregon EI/ECSE Immunization Rates (opens in new window/tab) Business Champions for Kids (opens in new window/tab) Care Connections & Education (opens in new window/tab) Parenting Resource Center South Central Early Learning Hub (opens in new window/tab) Take Root Parenting Take Root Parenting Douglas County Take Root Parenting Klamath County Take Root Parenting Lake County Educational Services: K-12+ District Instructional Systems Grant Reporting Perkins CTE Professional Learning Calendar Student Success Team Title III Educator Supports Douglas REN Education & Houselessness Instructional Coaches & Mentoring Professional Learning Calendar Youth Development Youth Reengagement Mentors Youth Activities Work-Based Learning Education Combines Student & Family Resources Care Connections & Education (opens in new window/tab) Intent to Homeschool Inter District Transfers-for students OTAP Professional Development Opportunities RSOI South Central Early Learning Hub (opens in new window/tab) Quicklinks Douglas ESD Calendar Flight Team News Print Services Professional Learning Calendar Public Reports School Districts Substitutes Staff Resources Employee Assistance Program Frontline Login (opens in new window/tab) Mandatory Reporter Office 365 Login (opens in new window/tab) Orange Frog Sharepoint (opens in new window/tab) Wellness Employment (opens in new window/tab) Join our Team! Human Resources CONTACT US Open Menu Logo Image Logo Title Quicklinks Douglas ESD Calendar Flight Team News Print Services Professional Learning Calendar Public Reports School Districts Substitutes Staff Resources Employee Assistance Program Frontline Login (opens in new window/tab) Mandatory Reporter Office 365 Login (opens in new window/tab) Orange Frog Sharepoint (opens in new window/tab) Wellness Employment (opens in new window/tab) Join our Team! Human Resources CONTACT US Open Search Search Clear Search Close Search Menu Open Board of Directors Contact Us Districts We Serve Facilities Join the Team! Leadership Team News Public Reports What We Do In This Section Board of Directors Contact Us Staff Directory Districts We Serve Facilities Join the Team! Leadership Team News Public Reports What We Do Breadcrumb Navigation Home > About Douglas ESD > News Previous Next Back to All News American Education Week Students share the importance of education American Education Week has been celebrated during the third week of November since 1921. This annual recognition honors the contributions of everyone involved in education and raises awareness of the vital role public schools play in shaping communities. In Douglas Education Service District’s 13 component school districts, students are building skills and exploring opportunities to prepare them for the future. From academic coursework to hands-on learning, students are engaged in developing the knowledge and confidence they need to take their next steps. To explore how education paves the way forward, we’re highlighting Camas Valley Charter School, an independent public school district. This charter district shapes its programs around the needs of community while meeting public school standards. The single-campus district is home to approximately 190 students in grades PreK–12. Community pride is evident. The 1A state championship dates are painted across the football bleachers. Senior class photographs line the school’s main hallway, a visual story of generations growing and learning together. Superintendent and Principal Don Wonsley has led the district for seven years. “We’re here for the students,” he said. “Our focus is our relationship with our kids. We stay rooted there.” In a recent survey more than 80% of the district’s students reported that two or more staff members are actively engaged in their lives, evidence of the district’s commitment to building meaningful relationships. “We focus on education, character and relationships,” Wonsley explained. “This approach prepares students for productive and meaningful futures.” Three students from the district took a moment to give us an inside look at how education is helping shape their futures. At the elementary level, students understand the importance of education. For fifth-grader Cora Breeling, the best part of school is the people. Cora shared what motivates her. “What makes me to do my best in school is to succeed in general. I like doing math, I like reading. I like school. I also like science. In science we’re doing a play about planets.” She’s playing the part of Venus and is working on memorizing her lines. “The Sun is bragging a lot,” she said. “I say, ‘Well, all of us have done our research, and you’re really just an average-size star.’” Cora’s creativity extends beyond the classroom as she imagines her future as an artist, singer or chef. She also participates in music at school. “Everyone does,” she added. The district’s focus on helping students succeed continues in middle school. Eighth-grader Rhylan Williams likes the close-knit environment. “It’s small,” he said. “Nobody gets left out. I don’t feel lonely.” Thinking about what motivates him, Rhylan said he looks ahead: “What is this going to do for me in the future? That’s my motivation. And I want to make my parents proud.” Rhylan shared his appreciation for being supported. When working through functions in math, his teacher took extra time to explain the lesson. “It makes me feel good,” he said. “Comprehending and fully grasping a subject is important to me.” Rhylan also mentioned gaining skills he knows will be valuable later, such as staying organized. “I need to be on track. I need to get things done and be organized,” he said, stating that he uses a planner to track homework and due dates. Rhylan is interested in becoming a chiropractor and said, “Middle school is flying by.” At the high school level, students are balancing growing responsibilities with a strong sense of community. Senior Jaiden Adams shared how much the school means to her. “I just love Camas. Everyone is so nice, so supportive. I came here in high school, and I was greeted with smiles. When asked what she has learned to prepare for the future, Jaiden answered, “I’ve learned it’s okay to ask for help. It makes me feel seen.” Jaiden’s motivation connects to her goals. “Definitely my sports motivate me to do my best in school,” she said. “I need to be a student before an athlete. Also, what I want to do after high school is to become a radiology technician, so I know I have to have super high grades.” She plans to attend community college and then enlist in the military to pursue her career path. Between honor choir, volleyball, basketball, track, student council and Travel Club, Jaiden said, “It never ends.” This spring, Travel Club is planning a trip to San Antonio, Texas, with past educational travel including Washington, D.C. and New York. Additionally, she plays bass guitar and is currently enjoying a basketball refereeing class, where she’s learning rules to officiate games. “I make sure I’m very much on top of my work. Definitely confidence is a factor in that, making sure I know I can do this.” Camas Valley continues to emphasize strong fundamentals in the classroom. “Reading is the key to academic success,” Wonsley shared. “We’ve invested heavily in reading programs, and all of our aides are focused on helping students build those foundational skills.” The district is also strengthening math instruction and expanding career pathways, including a new welding program for middle and high school students. Recent campus updates reflect this growth, with improvements to science, agriculture and music programs, a rebuilt barn and upgraded sports facilities, all designed to help students build skills and explore their interests. Wonsley also noted the strength and stability of the team. “Our common ground is our students,” he said. More than half of Camas Valley’s students live outside the area, a reflection of the charter school’s flexibility in serving a wider community. Students come together in a connected learning environment. Find out more at www.camasvalley.k12.or.us Back to All News Logo Image Logo Title Douglas Education Service District 1409 NE Diamond Lake Blvd. Suite 110 Roseburg OR 97470 541-440-4777 Facebook (opens in new window/tab) YouTube (opens in new window/tab) LinkedIn (opens in new window/tab) About Locations Staff Directory Equity Vision Statement Nondiscrimination Public Complaint Process (opens in new window/tab) Website Feedback Staff Login Provides collaborative, high-quality, equitable and locally responsive educational services to the community. Privacy Policy Site Map Accessibility Powered by Finalsite