CHAPTER 15: FAIR HOUSING, ACCESSIBILITY,
AND EQUAL EMPLOYMENT


CHAPTER PURPOSE & CONTENTS
This chapter summarizes the key regulations and requirements of fair housing, accessibility,
and equal employment and contracting laws applicable to CDBG projects.

                 SECTION                                             TOPIC

         15.4                        Introduction & Overview

         15.2                        Fair Housing

         15.3                        Handicapped Accessibility and Section 504

         15.4                        Employment and Contracting

         15.5                        Recordkeeping and Monitoring



15.1.     Introduction and Overview
The following is a Summary of the topics in this section, applicable statutory and regulatory
cites, and other reference materials available from HUD.

 Key Topics in This Section            Vv Basic Overview
                                       Y   Consolidated Plan/Analysis of Impediments
                                       Vv List of Applicable Laws
 Regulatory/Statutory Citations        Section 109
                                       §570.487 and 570.495(b)
 Other Reference Materials on This     v   Fair Housing Planning Guide website:
 Topic                                     http:/Awww.hud.gov/offices/fheo/images/fhpg.paf
                                       ¥   CDBG     — Toolkit on Crosscutting Issues
                                           http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/communitydevelopment/toolkit/index.cf
                                           m



15.1.1    Basic Overview
Vv This chapter summarizes the key regulations and requirements of fair housing and equal
   opportunity laws applicable to CDBG projects. To be in compliance, the UGLG must adhere
   to all the basic tenets of fair housing and equal opportunity regulations. To demonstrate
   support for ensuring these tenets, UGLGs must endorse in attitude and deed all regulations
   for fairness in the provision of CDBG funded programs and projects.
¥Y Fair housing and equal opportunity laws are like an umbrella, intended to protect individuals
   from discrimination in housing, employment, through business opportunities such as
   contracting, or through other benefits created by CDBG projects.


Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                                                       15-1
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



Vv Finally, there are some sample forms and templates on the website referenced above,
   CDBG - Toolkit on Crosscutting Issues.

15.1.2       Consolidated              Plan Requirements
¥ States are required to complete an analysis of impediments to fair housing choice within one
    year of the effective date of the Consolidated Plan Rule (February 6, 1995).                          The analysis is
    not required to be submitted as part of the consolidated plan, but the jurisdiction must certify
    that it completed the analysis, is taking appropriate actions to overcome the effects of any
    impediments identified through that analysis, and maintains records reflecting the analysis
    and related actions.

Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing Choice
¥   In accordance with the Fair Housing Act, the Secretary requires that states administer all
    programs and activities related to housing and community development in a manner to
    affirmatively further the policies of the Fair Housing Act. As part of the certification to
    affirmatively further fair housing that states are required to submit with their consolidated
    plan, states must complete an analysis of impediments to fair housing choice and to take
    actions to overcome the effects of any impediments identified through that analysis.
v   Insummary, requirements for the analysis of impediments include:
    —   States are to assume the responsibility of fair housing planning by conducting an analysis
        to identify impediments to fair housing choice within their jurisdictions;
    —   States are strongly encouraged to annually update their analysis of impediments; and
    —   States are to take appropriate actions to overcome the effects of any impediments
        identified through their analyses, maintaining records reflecting the analyses and related
        actions, and ensuring that units of local government funded by the state comply with the
        certification requirements.
15.1.3       List of Applicable Laws
¥ This chapter is broken down into three broad areas for the applicable requirements: Fair
  Housing; Handicap Accessibility; and Equal Opportunity. The fourth section of this chapter is
  dedicated toward appropriate record keeping and monitoring. Exhibit 19.1 provides the
  UGLG with references to the major regulations and requirements covering fair housing and
  equal opportunity.
                                                          Exhibit 15.1

                                             ;                         ;      ;                                   Equal
          Federal and State Laws and Regulations                    Fair Housing and   Accessibilit            Employment
                  (included amendments)                            Nondiscrimination                  y           ploy
                                                                                                             and Contracting
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964: This Act provides that
no person shall be excluded from participation, denied program
benefits, or subject to discrimination based on race, color,               x
and/or national origin under any program or activity receiving
Federal financial assistance.




Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                                                                   15-2
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (The Fair Housing
Act): This Act prohibits discrimination in housing on the basis
of race, color, religion, sex and/or national origin. This law also
requires actions which affirmatively promotes fair housing.

Restoration Act of 1987. This Act restores the broad scope of
coverage and clarifies the application of the Civil Rights Act of
1964. It also specifies that an institution which receives
Federal financial assistance is prohibited from discriminating on
the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex, disability,
or age in a program or activity which does not directly benefit
from such assistance.

Section 109 of Title 1 of the Housing and Community
Development Act of 1974: This section of Title 1 provides that
no person shall be excluded from participation (including
employment), denied program benefits, or subject to
discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, or sex
under any program or activity funded in whole or in part under
Title | of the Act.

The Fair Housing Amendment Act of 1988: This Act
amended the original Fair Housing Act to provide for the
protection of families with children and people with disabilities,
strengthen punishment for acts of housing discrimination,
expand of the Justice Department jurisdiction to bring suit on
behalf of victims in Federal district courts, and create an
exemption to the provisions baring discrimination on the basis
of familial status for those housing developments that qualify as
housing for persons age 55 or older.

The Housing for Older Persons Act of 1995 (HOPA):
Retained the requirement that the housing must have one
person who is 55 years of age or older living in at least 80
percent of its occupied units. The Act also retained the
requirement that housing facilities publish and follow policies
and procedures that demonstrate intent to be housing for
persons 55 and older.

The Age Discrimination Act of 1975: This Act provides that
no person shall be excluded from participation, denied program
benefits, or subject to discrimination on the basis of age under
any program or activity receiving Federal funding assistance.
Effective January 1987, the age cap of 70 was deleted from the
laws. Federal law preempts any State law currently in effect on
the same topic including: KRS 18A.140; KRS 344.040; 101
KAR 1:350 Paragraph 11; 101 KAR 1:375 Paragraph 2(3); 101
KAR 2:095 Paragraphs 6 and 7.




Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                  15-3
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1972: It is unlawful
to discriminate based on disability in Federally assisted
programs. This section provides that no otherwise qualified
individual shall, solely by reason of his or her disability, be
excluded from participation (including employment), denied             X    X    X
program benefits, or subjected to discrimination under any
program or activity receiving Federal funding assistance.
Section 504 also contains design and construction accessibility
provisions for multi-family dwellings developed or substantially
rehabilitated for first occupancy on or after March 13, 1991.

The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA): This Act
modifies and expands the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 to prohibit
discrimination against “a qualified individual with a disability” in
employment and public accommodations. The ADA requires
that an individual with a physical or mental impairment who is         X    xX   xX
otherwise qualified to perform the essential functions of a job,
with or without reasonable accommodation, be afforded equal
employment opportunity in all phases of employment.
Kentucky adopted this Act in 1992 with the enrollment and
passage of Senate Bill 210.

Executive Order 11063: This Executive Order provides that no
person shall be discriminated against on the basis of race,
color, religion, sex, or national origin in housing and related
facilities provided with Federal assistance and lending practices      x
with respect to residential property when such practices are
connected with loans insured or guaranteed by the Federal
government.

Executive Order 11259: This Executive Order provides that
the administration of all Federal programs and activities relating     xX
to housing and urban development be carried out in a manner
to further housing opportunities throughout the United States.

Section 109 of Title | of the Housing and Community
Development Act of 1974: Requires that no person shall be
excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be
subjected to discrimination under any program or activity
funded with CDBG funds on the basis of race, color, religion,
national origin, or sex.


The Equal Employment Opportunity Act: This Act empowers
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) to
bring civil action in Federal court against private sector
employers after the EEOC has investigated the charge, found                      X
“probable cause” of discrimination, and failed to obtain a
conciliation agreement acceptable to the EEOC. It also brings
Federal, State, and local governments under the Civil Rights
Act of 1964.




Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                                15-4
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



The Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA) of 1986.
Under IRCA, employers may hire only persons who may legally
work in the U.S., i.e., citizens and nationals of the U.S. and
aliens authorized to work in the U.S. The employer must verify
the identity and employment eligibility of anyone to be hired,
which includes completing the Employment Eligibility
Verification Form (I-9).

The Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection
Procedures adopted by the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission in 1978: This manual applies to employee
selection procedures in the areas of hiring, retention,
promotion, transfer, demotion, dismissal and referral. It is
designed to assist employers, labor organizations, employment
agencies, licensing and certification boards in complying with
the requirements of Federal laws prohibiting discriminatory
employment.

Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of
1968, as amended: Requires the provision of opportunities for
training and employment that arise through HUD-financed
projects to lower-income residents of the project area, to the
greatest extent feasible and consistent with Federal, State and
local laws and regulations. Also required is that contracts be
awarded to businesses that provide economic opportunities for
low- and very low-income persons residing in the area.
Amendments to Section 3 in 1992 included requirements for
providing these opportunities in contracts for housing
rehabilitation, including lead-based paint abatement, and other
construction contracts.

The Vietnam Era Veterans’ Readjustment Act of 1974
(revised Jobs for Veterans Act of 2002): This Act was
passed to ensure equal employment opportunity for qualified
disabled veterans and veterans of the Vietnam War.
Affirmative action is required in the hiring and promotion of
veterans.


Executive Order 11246: This Executive Order applies to all
Federally assisted construction contracts and subcontracts. It
provides that no person shall be discriminated against on the
basis of race.




Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                            15-5
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



15.2         Fair Housing
This section of the chapter reviews the requirements UGLGs                  must follow to be in compliance
with the Fair Housing Act when using CDBG funds.
The following is a Summary of the topics in this section, applicable statutory and regulatory
cites, and other reference materials available from HUD.

    Key Topics in This Section            Y   Prohibited Discrimination
                                          v   Fair Housing Activities
    Regulatory/Statutory Citations        Section 109
                                          §570.487 and 570.495(b)
    Other Reference Materials on This   | “   Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity Website:
    Topic                                     http://www.hud.gov/offices/fheo/index.cfm
                                          ¥   Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards website:
                                              http:/Awww.access-board.gov/ufas/ufas-html/ufas.htm
                                          Y   The Fair Housing Act Design Manual: A Manual to Assist Designers
                                              and Builders in Meeting the Accessibility Requirements of The Fair
                                              Housing Act
                                          ¥   CDBG   — Toolkit on Crosscutting Issues
                                              htto://www.hud.gov/offices/cod/communitydevelopment/toolkit/index.cf
                                              m
                                          Y   CPD Notice 05-09
                                          Y   CPD Notice 00-09



15.2.1        Prohibited         Discrimination
¥     UGLGs should be aware that fair housing provisions apply to the locality as a whole and not
      just those activities that are CDBG funded; and that implementing fair housing activities is an
      essential part of the CDBG responsibilities. No person shall be subjected to discrimination
      because of: race, color, religion, sex, disability, age, familial status, or national origin.
¥Y Fair housing actions should increase housing opportunities and affirmatively promote fair
   housing throughout the entire housing market at all income levels. These activities may
   include independent actions by the UGLG or cooperative ventures with housing related
   industries, such as mortgage lenders, home builders, and local non-profits working in
   housing. The UGLG is expected to take progressive actions to further fair housing with each
      CDBG project.
¥ The UGLG must assure that all CDBG-funded activities undertaken as part of the project are
  conducted in a manner which will not cause discrimination on the basis of race, color,
  religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin. Segregated facilities, services, or
  benefits and different treatment are prohibited.
v¥ The UGLG should take care to ensure the following:
      —   Access to any advantage arising out of the project is not:




Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                                                             15-6
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



        2c   Denied solely on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or
             national origin; or
        o    Offered for the enjoyment of a segment of the population in such a way as to
             intentionally exclude any member of these protected groups.
Y Selection of sites and locations for facilities and improvements do not have an exclusionary
    or discriminatory effect.
¥   Evaluation criteria and administrative practices do not have a discriminatory effect.
¥ Affirmative action is used to overcome the effects of past discrimination.
v A Fair Housing Poster is displayed in a prominent place at the office of the UGLG where
    applications for assistance are being taken.

15.2.2       Fair Housing        Activities
¥ The Fair Housing Act provides that, in connection with the design and construction of multi-
  family housing, the public use and common areas must be accessible and usable by persons
  with handicaps, all doors must be designed to be wide enough for wheelchair accessible,
  and all premises should be of adaptive design (e.g., reinforcements within a bathroom to
  allow installation of grab bars).
¥   UGLGs undertaking housing projects and activities must ensure fair housing rules are
    followed in the provision of housing services and assistance. Opportunities for purchase or
    rental, terms and conditions, advertising and marketing information, and availability of real
    estate services should not discriminate.
v¥ Some examples of possible actions to ensure fair housing are listed below.
    —   Developing and implementing a fair housing resolution;
    —   Marketing information concerning housing services and activities should be disseminated
        through agencies and organizations that routinely provide services to protected groups;
    —   Criteria for selecting recipients of housing services or assistance should be evaluated for
        any discriminatory effect;
    —   Policies guiding the provisions of relocation housing and services for persons displaced by
        housing activities should be evaluated for discriminatory effect; and
    —   Legal documents used by UGLGs and lending institutions should be reviewed and revised
        if necessary to eliminate any discriminatory intent or practice.
¥ It is important for UGLGs to understand both the Fair Housing Amendment and Section 504.
    The Fair Housing Amendment requires that a landlord must allow a tenant to make
    reasonable modifications to a unit paid for by the tenant. Section 504 provides that the
    landlord is responsible for making reasonable accommodations. Finally, the accessibility
    logo should be used in housing projects where units are available for the disabled.

15.2.3       Affirmative Marketing
¥   UGLGs must adopt affirmative marketing procedures and requirements for all CDBG-
    assisted housing with five or more units.
v¥ Requirements and procedures must include:




Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                                                   15-7
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



   —    Methods for informing the public, owners and potential tenants about fair housing laws
        and the UGLG's policies (for example, use of the Fair Housing logo or equal opportunity
        language);
   —    Adescription of what owners and/or the UGLG will do to affirmatively market housing
        assisted with CDBG funds;
   —    Adescription of what owners and/or the UGLG will do to inform persons not likely to apply
        for housing without special outreach;
   —    Maintenance of records to document actions taken to affirmatively market CDBG-assisted
        units and to assess marketing effectiveness; and
   —    Description of how efforts will be assessed and what corrective actions will be taken
        where requirements are not met.

15.3.      Handicapped Accessibility and Section 504
The following is a Summary of the topics in this section, applicable statutory and regulatory
cites, and other reference materials available from HUD.

 Key Topics in This Section            v    Programs
                                       Y    Housing
                                       VY Facilities
                                       ¥    Other Accessibility Rules
                                       ¥v   Self Evaluation and Transition Plan

 Regulatory/Statutory Citations        Section 109
                                       §570.487(e)
 Other Reference Materials on This   | “    Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity Website:
 Topic                                      http://www.hud.gov/offices/fheo/index.cfm
                                       ¥    CDBG      — Toolkit on Crosscutting Issues
                                            http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/communitydevelopment/toolkit/index.cf
                                            m
                                       Y    CPD Notice 05-10
                                       Y    CPD Notice 00-10

15.3.1      Program      Accessibility
¥ Communication is an important component of program accessibility.                       Disabilities involving
   impairments to hearing, vision, speech or mobility may affect communication.                     Members of
   the community who have disabilities must be able to access and enjoy the benefits of a
   program or activity receiving CDBG funds; therefore, varied approaches may be required to
   assure effective communication and information dissemination.
¥ Specifically, the UGLG must be receptive to the requests and needs of the disabled
   person(s) within the community when determining which auxiliary aids or services are
   necessary. For the purposes of Section 504 compliance, the target population includes: the
   hearing impaired, visually impaired, mobility impaired, developmentally disabled, and those




Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                                                             15-8
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



    persons requiring in-home care or institutional care.     UGLGs must furnish auxiliary aids and
    services, aS necessary, which may include:
¥Y For persons with hearing impairments:
    —   Qualified sign language interpreters;
    —   Note takers;
    —   Telecommunication devices for deaf persons (TDDs);
    —   Telephone handset amplifiers;
    —   Assertive listening devices (devices that increase the sound in large group settings);
    —   Flashing lights (where aural communication is used, such as warning bells);
    —   Video text displays (devices that display text that is simultaneously being spoken can be
        used where a public address system provides information);
    —   Transcription services; and
    —   Closed and open captioning.
¥   For persons with vision impairments:
    —   Qualified readers;
    —   Written materials translated into alternative formats (e.g., Braille, audio tape, large print);
    —   Aural communication (e.g., Bells or other sounds used where visual cues are necessary);
        and
    —   Audio description services (i.e., through a headset, a narrator describes what the visually
        impaired person cannot see).
¥ The UGLG must ensure effective communication with persons with all types of disabilities in
  all activities. Where the UGLG communicates with applicants and beneficiaries by phone, a
  TDD is required or an equivalent system must be available. Please note that UGLGs are not
  required to take any action that would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of a
  program or activity or undue financial and administrative burdens.

15.3.2      Housing
¥ Section 504 also includes accessibility requirements for new construction and substantial
    rehabilitation of multi-family rental housing.   Section 504 provides that no otherwise qualified
    individual shall, solely by reason of his or her disability, be excluded from participation in
    (including employment), denied program benefits, or subjected to discrimination under any
    program or activity receiving Federal funding assistance. Section 504 also contains design
    and construction accessibility provisions for certain new multi-family dwellings developed for
    first occupancy on or after March 13, 1991.
¥   For the purposes of compliance with Section 504, “accessible” means ensuring that program
    and activities, when viewed in their entirety, are accessible to and usable by individuals with
    disabilities. For housing purposes, accessible means a dwelling is on an accessible route
    and adaptable inside.
Y The following requirements apply to both Federally assisted newly constructed multifamily
  rental housing containing five or more units and substantial rehabilitation of multi-family



Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                                                15-9
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



    rental housing with 15 or more units. A rehabilitation project is considered substantial when
    the rehab costs will be 75 percent or more of the replacement cost of the complete facility;
    —   Aminimum of five percent of total dwelling units (but not less than one unit) accessible for
        individuals with mobility impairments;
    —   An additional two percent of dwelling units (but not less than one) accessible for persons
        with hearing or vision impairments;     and

    —   All units made adaptable that are on the ground level or can be reached by an elevator.

15.3.3      Facilities
¥ “Facility” is defined under Section 504 as any portion of a building, equipment, roads,
  walkways, parking lot or other real property. “Accessible” for non-housing purposes means
  that a facility or portion of a facility can be approached, entered and used by individuals with
  physical handicaps.
¥   Non-housing programs, as well as existing facilities in which they are situated, must be
    readily accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities. Accessibility programs will be
    determined once again under self-evaluation. The focus of program access is providing
    programs in the most integrated setting possible. Providing separate or different programs is
    illegal unless necessary to achieve equal opportunity.
¥   Methods of improving program access in existing facilities can include the following:
    —   Relocating programs to accessible facilities or accessible portions of facilities;
    —   Acquiring or building new facilities;
    —   Selectively altering facilities;
    —   Changing operating policies and procedures;
    —   Assigning aides to assist beneficiaries;
    —   Adding or redesigning equipment or furnishings; and
    —   Conducting home visits.

15.3.4      Special Requirements for UGLGs                   with 15 or More Employees
v There are two additional requirements for Section 504 compliance for UGLGs (called
  “recipients” under 504 to include public agencies, instrumentalities, and public and private
  entities including nonprofits) with 15 or more full or part-time employees:
¥   Designation of responsible employee and adoption of grievance procedures:
    —   Atleast one person must be designated to coordinate 504 and related compliance efforts.
        The agency coordinator should be designated in writing and identified in any written
        notices.
    —   A grievance procedure must also be adopted incorporating due process standards and
        allowing for prompt local resolution of any complaints of discrimination based on disability.
        Existing grievance procedures can often be adapted to satisfy this requirement.
    —   Any individual or authorized representative who believes that they have been denied
        opportunities or treated differently due to their race, color, national origin, sex, age




Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                                             15-10
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



        disability, religion and familial status may file   a complaint.   The complaint may be filed with
        the UGLG or HUD.
Y   Notification to participants, beneficiaries, applicants and employees of their nondiscriminatory
    provisions. In summary, the UGLG must provide notice regarding the following:
    —   UGLGs must publish in a newspaper of general circulation the notice “Policy of Non-
        Discrimination on the Basis of Disability Status.”
    —   UGLGs must include the same language found in their policy of nondiscrimination
        (mentioned in the first bullet) in all material used for recruitment or general information.
    —   UGLGs must ensure that all members of the population with visual or hearing impairments
        are provided with the information necessary to understand and participate in the programs
        offered.
    —   Methods for ensuring participation may include qualified sign language and oral
        interpreters, readers, or the use of taped and Braille materials.


15.3.5      Other Accessibility Rules
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA)
¥ The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) guarantees equal opportunities for
  persons with disabilities in employment, public accommodations, transportation, State and
  local government services, and telecommunications. Unlike Section 504 which applies only
  to programs and activities receiving Federal financial assistance, the ADA applies even if no
  Federal financial assistance is given. Title Il of ADA prohibits discrimination based on
  disability by State and local governments.
Y Facilities
    —   Title Il also requires that facilities that are newly constructed or altered, by, on behalf of, or
        for use of a public entity, be designed and constructed in a manner that makes the facility
        readily accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities. Facilities constructed or
        altered in conformance with either the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS) or
        the ADA Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG) shall be deemed to
        comply with the Title Il Accessibility requirements, except that the elevator exemption
        contained in Section 4.1.3(5) and Section 4.1.6(1)(j) of ADAAG shall not apply.
¥ Roads and Pedestrian Walkways
    —   Title Il specifically requires that all newly constructed or altered streets, roads, highways,
        and pedestrian walkways must contain curb ramps or other sloped areas at any
        intersection having curbs or other barriers to entry from a street level or pedestrian
        walkway and that all newly constructed or altered street level pedestrian walkways must
        have curb ramps at intersections . Newly constructed or altered street level pedestrian
        walkways must contain curb ramps or other sloped areas at intersections to streets,
        roads, or highways.

Architectural Barriers Act of 1968
¥ The Architectural Barriers Act of 1968 (ABA) requires that certain buildings financed with
  Federal funds must be designed, constructed, or altered in accordance with standards that



Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                                                 15-11
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



   ensure accessibility for persons with physical disabilities. The ABA covers any building or
   facility financed in whole or in part with Federal funds, except privately-owned residential
   structures. Covered buildings and facilities designed, constructed, or altered with CDBG
   funds are subject to the ABA and must comply with the Uniform Federal Accessibility
   Standards (UFAS). In practice, buildings built to meet the requirements of Section 504 and
   the ADA, will conform to the requirements of the ABA.



15.3.6    Self Evaluation         Plan and Transition Plan
Self Evaluation Plan
¥Y Self evaluation is required by both Section 504 and the Americans with Disabilities Act. Self
   evaluation promotes inclusion of the programmatic and project-specific alternations that are
   necessary to ensure long term compliance with the requirements.
v Ifa UGLG has not already performed a Section 504 self-evaluation of programs, services,
  and activities to determine if they are programmatically and physically accessible to person
  with disabilities, they must conduct such evaluation and document all needs. Note: Ifa
  UGLG has already performed a self-evaluation, a new one is not required.
¥ UGLGs should also involve persons with disabilities in these evaluations. While performing
  the self-evaluation, a careful inspection of the following should be performed to determine if
   they are free from discriminatory effects and practices:
  —   Evaluate current policies and practices and analyze them to determine if they adversely
      affect the full participation of individuals with disabilities in its programs, activities, and
      services. Be mindful of the fact that a policy or practice may appear neutral on its face,
      but may have a discriminatory effect on individuals with disabilities.
  —   Modify any policies and practices that are not or may not be in compliance with Section
      504 or Title Il and Title Ill of the ADA regulations.   (See 24 CFR Part 8 and 28 CFR Parts
      35, 36.)
  —   Take appropriate corrective steps to remedy those policies and practices that either are
      discriminatory or have a discriminatory effect. Develop policies and procedures by which
      persons with disabilities may request a modification of a physical barrier or a rule or
      practice that has the effect of limiting or excluding a person with a disability from the
      benefits of the program.
  —   Document the self-evaluation process and activities. HUD recommends that all recipients
      keep the self-evaluation on file for at least three years, including records of the individuals
      and organizations consulted, areas examined and problems identified, and document
      modifications and remedial steps.
v¥ An approach many UGLGs have used to examine service and program accessibility is to do
   a walk-through of the process required for participation. Analyze not only the physical path
   traveled, but also the administrative requirements, service delivery, eligibility criteria, and
   application procedures.
Vv Any policies and practices that are found to be discriminatory or contrary to Section 504
   requirements must be modified and steps taken to remedy the discrimination.




Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                                              15-12
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



Transition Plan
¥     lf structural barriers have been identified during the self-evaluation process and cannot be
      removed with nonstructural solution, a Transition Plan must be completed and made
      available for public review and comment.
¥v The plan must address the following items:
      —   Identification of physical obstacles in the facilities that limit program accessibility;
      —   Description of the method that will be used to make facilities accessible;
      —   Specify a schedule to achieve full program compliance and, if the plan is longer than one
          year, identify steps to be taken during each year;
      —   Indicate the person responsible for implementing the plan; and
      —   Identify the person or groups with whose assistance the plan was prepared.
¥ The UGLG is not necessarily required to make each existing facility or every part of an
  existing facility accessible. The Transition Plan must involve persons with disabilities and/or
  representative organizations.

15.4         Employment and Contracting
Employment and contracting activities also trigger employment and contracting rules related to
equal employment practices.
The following is a Summary of the topics in this section, applicable statutory and regulatory
cites, and other reference materials available from HUD.

    Key Topics in This Section           ¥    Employment
                                         Y Section 3
    Regulatory/Statutory Citations       Section 109
                                         §570.487 and 570.495(b)
    Other Reference Materials on This   | ¥   Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity Website:
    Topic                                     http:/Awww.hud.gov/offices/fheo/index.cfm
                                          ¥   CDBG     — Toolkit on Crosscutting Issues
                                              http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/communitydevelopment/toolkit/index.c
                                              fm
                                          ¥   The Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures adopted
                                              by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission    in 1978



15.4.1        Employment
Y     Nondiscrimination is a requirement of employment and employment practices. Employment
      opportunities may not be denied on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, religion,
      familial status, or disability. Affirmative action and equal employment opportunity policies are
      fundamental aspects of CDBG funded activities.
¥ The Americans with Disabilities Act modifies and expands the Section 504 Rehabilitation Act
  of 1973 to prohibit discrimination against “a qualified individual with a disability” in



Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                                                        15-13
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



    employment and public accommodations.           The ADA requires that an individual with a
    physical or mental impairment who is otherwise qualified to perform the essential functions of
    a job, with or without reasonable accommodation, be afforded equal employment opportunity
    in all phases of employment.
¥ The Equal Employment Opportunity Act empowers the Equal Employment Opportunity
  Commission (EEOC) to bring civil action in Federal court against private sector employers
  after the EEOC has investigated the charge, found “probable cause” of discrimination, and
  failed to obtain a conciliation agreement acceptable to the EEOC. It also brings Federal,
  State, and local governments under the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
v Steps that can be taken to prevent discrimination in employment include the following:
    —   Review of jurisdictional employment policies and procedures for discriminatory intent or
        practice and document review;
    —   Advertise employment opportunities and/or to recruit employees for project-related
        positions;
    —   Develop and maintain employment data that indicates staff composition by race, sex,
        handicap status and national origin; and
    —   An Equal Employment Opportunity Poster must be displayed in a prominent place at the
        office of the UGLG.
Vv Specifically, Section 504 has a number of general prohibitions against employment
    discrimination.     UGLGs   must ensure that the following items are adhered to:
    —   No qualified individual with a disability shall, solely on the basis of their disability be
        subject to discrimination in employment under any program or activity that receives
        Federal assistance.
    —   Any UGLG cannot legally limit, segregate or classify applicants or employees in any way
        that negatively affects their status or opportunities because of disability.
¥   In pre-employment and employment activities, discrimination based on a disability must not
    occur and reasonable accommodations must be made to the physical or mental limitations of
    otherwise qualified individuals unless it creates undue hardship for the UGLG.          HUD
    regulations specify that an employer is prohibited from discrimination in the following
    instances:
    —   Recruiting, advertising, and processing of applications;
        o   Hiring, upgrading, promoting, tenure, demotion, transfer, layoffs, termination right or
            return from layoffs, illness, and rehiring;
            Rates of pay and any other forms of compensation;
            Job assignments, classifications and descriptions, organizational structures, lines,
            progression, and seniority lists;
            Leaves of absence, sick leave, or any other leave;
            Fringe benefits available by virtue of employment;
            Selection and financial support for training, including apprenticeship, professional
            meetings, conferences, and other related activities and selection for leaves of absence
            for training;


Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                                                15-14
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



         co   Employer sponsored activities (including social or recreation programs); and
         o    Any other term, condition, or privilege of employment.
¥     UGLGs may not participate in a contractual or other relationship that subjects qualified
      disabled applicants or employees to discrimination.
v¥ Reasonable accommodation, under Section 504, in employment is determined on a case-by-
   case basis. It means reasonable modifications on the job or in the workplace to enable a
      disabled person to perform the job for which she/he is qualified.       Section 504 does not
      require the hiring or promotion of someone simply because she/he has a disability.

15.4.2        Section 3
¥ Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended, requires the
  provision of training, employment and other economic opportunities that arise through HUD-
  financed housing and community development assistance to lower-income residents of the
  project area, particularly residents of government-subsidized housing, to the greatest extent
  feasible and consistent with Federal, State, and local laws and regulations. Also required is
  that contracts be awarded to businesses that provide economic opportunities for low- and
  very low-income persons residing in the project area. Amendments to Section 3 in 1992
  included requirements for providing these opportunities in contracts for housing rehabilitation,
  including lead-based paint abatement, and other construction contracts.
¥ Section 3 applies when a housing construction, housing rehabilitation or other public
  construction project or activity exceeds certain thresholds. Contractors and subcontractors
  providing services on projects for which the total amount of the housing and community
  development assistance exceeds $200,000 and the amount of the contract or subcontract
  exceeds $100,000 are required to comply with Section 3. If a UGLG receives housing or
  community development assistance for a covered project that is funded in part with CDBG
  funds, Section 3 requirements apply to the entire project or activity.
¥     Itis important to document efforts made to comply with Section 3 through recordkeeping.
      Files should contain memoranda, correspondence, advertisements, etc., illustrating
      contractor and subcontractor attempts to hire low income residents and business concerns.
Vv Finally, there are some forms and templates related to Section 3 on the website referenced
      above, CDBG — Toolkit on Crosscutting Issues.

15.5          Recordkeeping and Monitoring
Effective recordkeeping procedures and monitoring are tools that UGLGs use to ensure short
term and long term compliance.
The following is a Summary of the topics in this section, applicable statutory and regulatory
cites, and other reference materials available from HUD.

    Key Topics in This Section          Vv Fair Housing Records
                                             Direct Benefit Records
                                       NNN




                                             504 Records
                                             Employment and Contracting
                                             Monitoring
                                       SN




                                             FHEO Compliance and Monitoring



Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                                               15-15
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



    Regulatory/Statutory Citations           Section 109
                                             §570.490(a)(b)
    Other Reference Materials on This      | “   Guide to National Objectives and Eligible Activities for States
    Topic                                        - Chapter 2, Chapter 3
                                             ¥   Managing CDBG: A Guidebook for CDBG            UGLGs on Subrecipient
                                                 Oversight
                                             ¥   CDBG   — Toolkit on Crosscutting Issues
                                                 http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/communitydevelopment/toolkit/index.cf
                                                 m



15.5.1           Fair Housing           Records
¥ The following records must be maintained by the UGLG                        in a separate equal opportunity and
  fair housing file:
      —     Documentation of the action(s) the UGLG has taken to affirmatively further fair housing,
            including records on funds provided, if any, for such actions; and
      —     Demographic data (actual survey or latest Census/American Community Survey data)
            depending on the project undertaken may include:
            2    The population of the jurisdiction of the unit of general local government receiving
                 CDBG funds;
            2    The minority population of the locality (number and percentage);
            o    The target area population;
            2c   The minority population of the target area (number and percentage);
            co   The number of disabled, elderly households, and female-headed households in the
                 target area; and
            o    A map of the locality showing the locations of assisted housing units, concentrations of
                 minority population, concentrations of LMI, and the target area.

15.5.2           Direct Benefit Records
¥ Itis important that UGLGs maintain statistical information on the persons benefiting from the
      project be maintained and updated throughout the implementation of the project. Even if the
      project activities meet the “presumptive benefit” test for proving LMI benefits and surveys
      have not been conducted or statistical data on beneficiaries has not been collected, benefit
      data for fair housing and equal opportunity purposes must be maintained.
¥     UGLGs should note that those benefiting from the project must be determined. A Project
      Benefit Profile must be maintained for each activity except administration, planning, and
      contingency.
      —     For direct benefit activities, provide data on the extent to which persons have applied for
            benefits and participated in or benefited from any program or activity funded in whole or in
            part with CDBG     funds.    Records must be kept by race, ethnicity, and gender of heads of
            households.




Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                                                                  15-16
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



15.5.3          Section 504 Records
¥ The following records must be maintained by the UGLG            in a separate 504 file:
    —   Acopy of the self-evaluation;
    —   Acopy of the transition plan;
    — A        list of interested persons who were consulted;
    —   Adescription of areas and buildings examined and any problems identified;
    —   Adescription of modifications made and remedial steps taken to comply with the
        regulations; and
    —     Evidence that new or substantial rehab multi-family projects were
          constructed/rehabilitated to meet 504 standards.

15.5.4          Employment          and Contracting
¥   Data on employment of the local government that is carrying out an activity funded in whole
    or in part with CDBG funds. The data to be maintained in the files includes:
    —   A description of the local government work force in percentage by race, gender, job title,
        salary, and hire date;
    —   The percentage of minorities in the jurisdiction of the unit of general local government that
          is receiving CDBG funds and the percentage of minorities working for that unit of general
          local government;
    —   The number of project area residents employed with CDBG funds;
          2    Data should show the percentage by race and gender of the personnel in any
               department, office, or agency of the unit of local government using CDBG funds to
               employ staff.
          co   For example, if CDBG funds are being used to pay a portion of a bookkeeper's salary
               in the accounting department of the city, then employment data should be available for
               the department.
    —     Government hiring practices and policies;
    —   Affirmative Action Plan (if applicable);
    —     Documentation of the affirmative actions the UGLG has taken to overcome the effects of
          prior discrimination as determined through a formal compliance review or court
          proceeding, where the UGLG has previously discriminated against persons on the
          grounds of race, color, national origin, or sex in administering a program or activity funded
          in whole or in part with CDBG funds.
    —     Procurement procedures and implementation plan;
    —     Minority and Women       Business Enterprise (MBE/WBE) outreach and networking;
    —     MBE and WBE        reporting;
    —     Section 3 Plan;
    —     Section 3 Summary       Report (PER); and




Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                                             15-17
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
Chapter 15: Fair Housing



    —   Section 3 reporting by contractors.

15.5.5     Monitoring
v The designated fair housing and equal opportunity coordinator and/or officers should review
  compliance requirements on an annual basis.
¥ States will be monitored by HUD on a periodic basis.      Proper notification of a monitoring visit
    will be provided. However, it is important for states and UGLGs to keep all records and files
    in “monitoring readiness” condition at all times. Some of the areas HUD staff will review to
    determine if states and UGLGs meet compliance with all fair housing and equal opportunity
    requirements and laws are listed below:
    —   Acheck of the availability and adequacy of employment records;
    —   Identification of programs and activities assisted through CDBG funding and assessment
        of program impact on protected groups;
    —   An examination of procurement procedures and awards to assess the utilization of
        minority and/or female owned enterprises and businesses located in the project area or
        owned in substantial part by project area residents;
    —   Areview of voluntary efforts to promote fair housing; and
    —   An examination of the extent to which various protected groups have been impacted by
        relocation activities.

15.5.6     HUD     FHEO     Compliance and Monitoring
¥ HUD’s Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity (FHEO) is responsible for seeking
    cooperation from and providing assistance to states and UGLGs      regarding compliance.
    FHEO may perform periodic reviews of states and UGLGs or require reports or other
    information to measure compliance including records of program participation by individuals
    with handicaps.
V   It is important for states and UGLGs to keep organized records and document their Section
    504 activities.
¥ Acomplaint can be made by any individual or authorized representative of that individual
  who believes they have been denied opportunities or treated differently, due to their race,
  ethnicity, gender, disability, or age.
¥ This complaint would be filed with FHEO under the Housing Discrimination Form 903.1. The
  complainant’s identity will be held in confidence unless written authorization is given. The
    time period for filing complaints is within 180 days of the alleged act. States and UGLGs
    should have copies of this form available to the public.
¥Y Person who believes his/her rights have been violated may file in Federal court. The remedy
   through court action may include the award of damages, back pay, seniority and as with any
   equal opportunity action, attorney fees, or injunction against the noncomplying project.
Vv It is HUD’s policy to encourage informal resolutions to matters, solicit voluntary compliance
   and corrective action. Noncompliance may result ultimately in the termination of or refusal to
   grant Federal assistance.




Basically CDBG for States (April 2012)                                                           15-18
HUD, Office of Block Grant Assistance
