                         OHCS     ELDERLY BOND MONITORING REPORT
                                 INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETION

Following are the instructions for completing the Elderly Bond Monitoring Report (Excel). The instructions
follow the order of the information requested on the form.

    e   Ensure that all columns are completed
    e   All units should be listed in reports submitted to OHCS
    e   Include all move-in and move-out activity for the calendar year or reporting period


TOP SECTION
Property
List the full name of the property.
Address
List the complete property address.
County
List the county in which the property resides.
Date
Enter the report completion date.

Reporting Period
Indicate the period for which the reporting is being provided. If it is being attached to a CCPC it should be for
the entire prior year. For example, if you are completing the 2019 CCPC the reporting period would be January
1, 2019 through December 31, 2019.
If you are providing this report for an annual review it should report information from the beginning of the year
to the current date. For example, if you are being reviewed on September 1, 2019 the reporting period would be
January 1, 2019 through September 1, 2019 (or shortly before that depending on when the report is requested).

Person Completing the Report
Indicate the name of the individual completing the report.

Required Set-Aside
Indicate Federal designation of 20@50 or 40@60 or other (fill-in) as applicable. Mark the applicable set-aside
with an “X”. Also indicate the number of units in the property that are required in order to meet the set-aside
percentage.


UNIT/RESIDENT DETAIL SECTION

(A) Unit Number
Indicate the unit number. Units may be listed multiple times in order to report all move-in and move-out
activity during the reporting period.

(B) Number of Bedrooms
List the number of bedrooms in the unit (1= one-bedroom, 2= two-bedroom, etc.)


(C) Tenant Name
List the first and last name of the Head of Household in this column.
(D) Current HH Size
Indicate the total number of people residing in the unit.

(E) Move-In Date
Indicate the move-in date of the household for the unit listed.

(F) Annual Recertification Date
Indicate when the most recent annual recertification occurred.

(G) Move-Out Date
If a household moved out during the reporting period list the move-out date in this column.
For example, if the reporting period was January 1, 2019 through December 31, 2019 and a
resident vacated on June 1, 2019 you would list June 1, 2019 in this column.
Please note that one unit could be listed numerous times on the report. For example, if a
resident moved into Unit #6 on February 2, 2019, moved out on September 2, 2019 and
another resident moved in on October 3, 2019, Unit #6 would be listed two times in
order to demonstrate all of the activity for that unit.

(H) Qualified Vacant (Yes or No)
If the unit is vacant and included as a qualified vacant unit to meet the property’s set-aside
requirement, indicate with a “Yes” in this box. Please note that all vacant units used to meet
the set-aside requirements must be able to demonstrate by documentation that a low-income
certified tenant previously resided in the unit.

(1) Household Annual Gross Income
Indicate the total annual gross income for the household based on move-in certification
or the most recent recertification for the reporting year as applicable.

(J) Maximum Annual HH Income
Indicate the maximum annual household gross income allowable for the household size, based
upon the county limits. This can be found on page 2 of the tenant income certification (TIC).

(ix) Tenant Paid Rent
Indicate the actual amount of rent the tenant pays. This amount should not include any tenant-
based or project- based subsidies.

(L) Rent Subsidy Amount
Indicate the amount of rent subsidy paid on behalf of the tenant, such as tenant and/or project-
based subsidy (rental assistance) amounts. This would include Section 8 tenant-based
vouchers and Section 8 or RD project- based assistance. If none, indicate “zero” or “N/A”.

(M) Unit Part of Set-Aside? (Yes or No)
Indicate if the unit is included in the property’s required set-aside.
