Page 1 of 28
Approved by:
 DAS (Name and Title)
  Kelly Mix, State Chief Procurement Officer       Date


  Kelle WA x                                              December 14, 2022


         Ve
Changes:
 Date             Draft           DAS Staff                Description of change
                                  Representative




                                                                                   Page 2 of 28
                                     SERVICE LEVEL AGREEMENT
                                               TABLE OF CONTENTS




Taligele|0(¢}\
            (0) a ee       eee                                                                                                                             4
1.1. Objectives and purpose of Service Level Agreement (SLA) .............ccccccccceeeeseeeeeceseeeeeeeeeseeeeaees 4
1.2. Identification Of PS Program. ...........cccccccccseeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenaaaeeeeecaaaaaeeeeeeaaaeeeeeseeeeesesaeeeeeeeaeaees 4
SErviCe Catalog ...........ccecccccseeeeceeceeeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeaaeaeeeeecaeaaaeeeeesaaaeeeeseaaeeeeeeeeaeeeeeesaageeeeeseeaeeeeeensaes 5
2.1. List of services provided by PS Program ............::ccccccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeecaeeseeeeceeageeeeesaaeeeeeeaeeneeeeeeees 5
Service Level Expectations. .............ccccccccececeeceeeeeeeeceeaeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeesaaaeeeecaaaaeeeeseeaaeeeeeeaseeeeeseseeeessaeaaes 6
3.1. PerformManCe MEITICS ............cccceececee cee eeeeeeceeaeeeeeeeaeseeeeeeaaeseeeeeaaaaeeeesaaaaaeeeeesaaaeeeeesaseeeseaeaneeeeesaes 6
3.2. Service levels / performance tarQets .............cccccceeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeecaeaaeeeeseeaaeeeseeeaaeeeeeeaeeneeeeesnes 6
Financial PrOCESSES ...........cccccceeeeeeece cee eeeeeceeeaeeeeeeeaaaeeeeceauaeeeeeeaaaeeseeaaeaeeeeceeaaeeesesageeeeesaeaeeeeessaneeeees 7
7       =|                                                                                                                                                 7
4.2. Billing GISDUTES 2.2.0...            eee ec ee ccc eeeeee ee ceeeeeeeecaeaaaeeeceeaaaeeeeesaaaeeeeeeaaaeeeeesaeaaeeeeseeaaaeesesauseeeeesaeeeeeeeeaes 7
4.3. PAYIMEMN..........      ccc cceeeecee cee eeeeeece eee eeeeeeaaeaeeeeecaeaaaeeecesaaaeeeeesaaaeeeeeeaaaaeeeeseaaaeeeesesaaaeeeeeeaneeeeseeeaeeeeseees 7
7AX¢}
  (0) 0\10 0       ee                                                                                                                                      7
Contact Datta «22.0... ceccccccceeeeeeceeceeeeeeeceeeeaeeeeeeaaaeeeseeaeaeeeeeeaaaaeeeeesaeaeeeesaeaaeeeeesaaaeeeeesageeeeeeseeseeeeseaeaees 8
rAN6) 8-100] (-)      ee                                                                                                                                   9
7.1. Service Catalog SNEetS .............ceececcecceeeeeee
                                     cee eeeeeceeaeeeeeeeeaeaeeeeeeaaaaeeeeesaaaaaeeesesaeeeeeesaseeeesaneaeeeees 9
7.2 SLA performance measure data CICTIONALICS .............ccceecseeeeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeaeeeeeeaeaeeeeeseanseeeees 23
7.3 Rate Methodologies .............ccccccceeeceececeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeecaeeeeeecaaaaaeeeceeaaaeeeeeeaaeeeeesaaeeeeessaaeeeeessanseeeees 28




                                                                                                                                                Page 3 of 28
  1. Introduction

     1.1. Objectives and purpose of Service Level Agreement (SLA)
 The objective of this SLA document is to ensure both DAS Procurement Services (PS) staff and
 customers understand and agree how the services will be performed and the responsibilities and
 expectations of each party.

 The SLA:

     a)   Describes the services provided by PS.

     b)   Identifies service level objectives and performance targets for the services, agreed
          upon between PS and customers.

     c)   Identifies responsibilities of each party.

     d)   Documents the following service management processes:

              1.   Performance tracking and reporting to customers.
             2.    Review and amendment of the SLA document.
             3.    Service-related dispute resolution.

 This SLA document is not meant to be static, but        a working document that will reflect the continuous
 change in services delivered by DAS, service delivery operating processes, and service level
 expectations agreed between PS and customers.


     1.2. Identification of PS Program
          1.2.1. Short description of PS program mission
 Oregon Department of Administrative Services (DAS) works to effectively implement the
 policy and financial decisions made by the Governor and the Oregon Legislature.

 PS is the enterprise-wide purchasing authority for the State of Oregon and fulfills a variety of roles
 within state government:
     e    Procurement of goods and services on behalf of state agencies, leveraging the purchasing
          power of local governments, state agencies and other states to ensure the cost-effective
          acquisition of goods and services.
     e    Providing training and consultation to employees of state and local governments, and suppliers
          on the application of purchasing laws, rules, procedures, and policies and best practice as
          recognized by the Universal Public Purchasing Certification Council.
     e    Maintenance of an enterprise-wide eProcurement system to support statewide procurement,
          purchasing and invoice settlement activities.

          1.2.2. Applicable statutes, rules and policies


           Statute Rule or Policy                                            Summary
Oregon Public Contracting Code                           279A Applies to all public contracting
                                                         279B Applies to supplies and services
                                                         279C Applies to architectural, engineering, land




                                                                                                        Page 4 of 28
                                                       surveying services and related services; and
                                                       public improvements
                                                       279.835-855 Applies to OregonForward
                                                       Program
OAR 125-055-0005-0130                                  Rules governing the OregonForward Program
                                                       HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and
                                                       Accountability Act) Privacy and Security Rule
                                                       Implementation
OAR 125.246                                            General Provisions for Public Contracting
OAR 125.247                                            Public Procurement of Supplies and Services
OAR 125.248                                            Consultant Selection: Architectural, Engineering
                                                       and Land Surveying Services and Related
                                                       services Contracts
OAR 125.249                                            General Provisions Related to Public Contracts
                                                       for Construction Services
OAR 137.045                                            Division 45 Review of Public Contracts
OAR     137.046                                        Division 46 Model Rules — General      Provisions
                                                       Related to Public Contracting
OAR 137.047                                            Division 47 Model Rules — Public Procurements
                                                       for Goods or Services
OAR 137.048                                            Division 48 Model Rules — Consultant Selection;
                                                       Architectural, Engineering and Land Surveying
                                                       services and Related Services Contracts
OAR 137.049                                            Division 49 Model Rules - Procedures for Public
                                                       Contracting for Construction Services.


 2. Service Catalog
 The service catalog lists and describes the main services PS provides to its customers.


       2.1. List of services provided by PS program
 A brief description of each service is included in the section below. For detailed descriptions, review the
 service catalog sheets in section 7.1 of this SLA document.

Service              Summary

1. Agency specific|PS partners with customer agencies to facilitate the procurement process. Provides
  procurements       |comprehensive agency specific procurement and contracting services to aid agencies
                     in the development of agency specific solicitations and contracts.

2. Statewide Price |PS maintains a portfolio of Statewide Price Agreements and multi-jurisdictional
      Agreements     {cooperative procurements. These agreements are readily available to Authorized
                     Agencies via the eProcurement system.

 3. Procurement      /PS provides consultation services to DAS divisions and customer agencies to facilitate
      consultation   —__|the procurement process. Consultation can be part of a full procurement process
                     managed by PS, or a stand-alone service provided to the customer.




                                                                                                           Page 5 of 28
                   PS provides Oregon specific, legislatively mandated public procurement related
  4. Training & __ {training services to all state government personnel who have procurement and contract
  certification             administration responsibilities in their daily work. The program also maintains an
    services                Oregon Public Procurement certification program that has the goals of 1) improving the
                            skills of public employees who spend public funds on goods and services, and 2)
                            educating on procurement practices that promote fair, transparent, and responsible
                            business practices consistent with Oregon Statutes and Administrative Rules.

  5. Access to              OregonBuys is the state’s eProcurement system for accessing public agency
    Enterprise              procurement opportunities. Most state agencies and many local governments use
 eProcurement               /OregonBuys to reach suppliers in order to procure goods and services.
     System                 OregonBuys is the means by which agencies advertise procurement opportunities,
                            meeting the requirements of Oregon's public contracting code.

 6. Embedded            _    |PS may provide embedded   staff into your team, depending on availability and approval
  procurement               by their manager.
            staff
7. Procurement               PS reviews special requests for approval, provides policy guidance, and develops
policy services             administrative rules. These services are paid by assessment to the agency.




3. Service Level Expectations
       3.1. Performance metrics
This subsection identifies the metrics that will be used to track quality of service delivery along with
timeliness and other service-related attributes. PS baseline timeframes are published on this webpage:
https://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/SLA.aspx.

       1)     Percent of agency specific procurements completed within the published baseline
              timeframes.
       2)     OregonBuys help desk effectiveness: Average rating of effectiveness of OregonBuys help
              desk staff as per customer survey.
       3)     Satisfaction with procurement training: Average overall satisfaction rating on evaluation
              surveys completed by state agency employees who have finished any procurement training
              course.

       4)     Satisfaction with PS Customer Service & Communication.


       3.2. Service levels / performance targets
Metric                      Metric Description             Key Quality     |Service Performance|     SLE- (Agreed upon
Number                                                       Attribute        Metric applies to      performance target)

               Percent of agency specific                  Timeliness /        Agency Specific
   1           procurements completed within the |          cycle times         Procurement                   85%
               published baseline timeframes

               Average rating of OregonBuys help | Effectiveness of
               desk staff effectiveness as per     OregonBuys help|Access to OregonBuys                   9 (out of 10)
   2           customer survey                                 desk




                                                                                                                Page 6 of 28
  3              Average overall satisfaction rating on | Satisfaction with        Training and                80%
                 evaluation surveys completed by               training       certification services
                 state agency employees who have
                 finished any procurement
                 training course
  4              Satisfaction with PS Customer              Timeliness of     Agency customers                 80%
                 Service & Communication                   communication




4. Financial                Processes
      4.1. Billing

      e         Assessment: PS assesses customer agencies on an annual basis. The assessment is based
                on each agency’s FTE.
      e         Training: PS training billing is done through the registration process.          Customers   register for
                classes using Workday Learning and can pay with a credit card.
      e         Vendor Collected Administrative Fees (VCAF): Price agreement vendors are invoiced
                quarterly based on the VCAF percentage listed in the price agreement and the actual volume
                sales report (VSR) provided by the vendor.


      4.2. Billing disputes
      Billing disputes are handled by PS managers:

                   e   Darwin Kumpula             (971) 900-7436        darwin.kumpula@das.oreqgon.gov
                   e   John Anglemier             (971) 349-2346        john.anglemier@das.oregon.gov
                   e   Norma Armstrong            (971) 209-9964        norma.armstrong@das.oregon.gov
                   e   Brent Lutz                 (971) 719-3436        brent.|.lutz@das.oregon.gov

  Phone calls or emails describing the issue are quickly researched and addressed.


      4.3. Payment
      PS follows the standard State of Oregon terms of net 30 days on all invoicing.

5. Acronyms
          ¢     CHRO: Chief Human Resources Office.
          ¢     COBID: Certification Office for Business Inclusion and Diversity. This Office promotes
                opportunities for disadvantages business enterprises, minority-owned, woman-owned, service-
                disabled veterans owned, and emerging small business.
           ¢    DAS: Department of Administrative Services.
           ¢    DAS-SFS: Department of Administrative Services Shared Financial Services.
           ¢«   DOJ: Department of Justice.
           ¢    DPO: Designated Procurement Officer.
          ¢     EAM: Enterprise Asset Management.
          ¢     EGS: Enterprise Goods and Services.
          ¢     EIS: Enterprise Information Services.
          ¢     FAQ: Frequently Asked Questions.



                                                                                                                Page 7 of 28
       ¢    FTE: Full-Time Equivalent
       ¢    HIPAA: Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.
       «    IAA: Interagency Agreement.
       ¢    IGA: Intergovernmental Agreement.
       ¢    ITI: Information Technology Investment Form.
       ¢    ITB: Invitation to Bid.
       ¢    MBPO: Master Blanket Purchase Order.
      ¢     OA: OregonBuys agency Organization Administrator.
      ¢     OAR: Oregon Administrative Rule.
      ¢     ORCPP: Oregon Cooperative Procurement Program.
      ¢     OregonForward: OregonForward Program formerly known as Qualified Rehabilitation Facilities
            (QRF).
       ¢«   ORS: Oregon Revised Statute.
       ¢«   PO: Purchase Order.
       ¢    PS: Procurement Services.
      ¢     RFI: Request for Information.
      ¢     REP: Request for Proposal.
      ¢     RFQ: Request for Quote.
      ¢     SA: Service Agreement.
      ¢     SFMA: Statewide Financial Management Application
      ¢     SFMS: Statewide Financial Management System
      ¢«    SLA: Service Level Agreement.
      ¢     SLE: Service Level Expectation.
      ¢     VCAF: Vendor Collected Administrative Fee.


6. Contact Data
  «         Procurement Services is located at:

                   General Services Building (2"¢ floor)
                   1225 Ferry Street, Salem OR, 97301
                   503-378-4642
                   httos :/Awww.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/Index.aspx

  ¢         Procurement Services Management Team:

                  Kelly Mix                       (971) 719-1680   kelly. mix@das.oregon.gov
                  State Chief Procurement Officer

                  Darwin Kumpula               (971) 900-7436      darwin.kumpula@das.oregon.gov
                  Deputy Chief Procurement Officer

                 John Anglemier                (971) 349-2346       john.anglemier@das.oregon.gov
                 Sourcing services contracts, OregonForward

                  Norma Armstrong                 (971) 209-9964   norma.armstrong@das.oregon.gov
                  Sourcing Information Technology

                  Brent Lutz                   (971) 719-3436 — brent.|.luiz@das.oregon.gov
                  Sourcing commodities, construction & facilities




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 28
7. Appendixes

 7.1. Service Catalog sheets

 1 - Agency Specific Procurements



a. Service Summary     |} PS partners with customer agencies to facilitate the procurement process by
                         providing comprehensive agency specific procurement and contracting services
                         to aid agencies in the development of agency specific solicitations and contracts.
                         These services include, but are not limited to the following:
                             1. Determining the most efficient and cost-effective sourcing strategy -
                                   which may include utilization of an existing Statewide Price Agreement or
                                   the creation of an agency specific solution.
                             2.    Translating customer identified business outcomes into the language of
                                   procurement.
                             3.    Managing all phases of the procurement process, including:
                                       a)      Advertising the procurement opportunity,
                                       b)      Receiving responses to solicitations,
                                       c)      Leading agency subject matter experts in evaluating vendor
                                               responses,
                                       d)      Negotiating contract terms and conditions,
                                       e)      Executing contracts, and
                                       f)      Providing ongoing contract administration.
                             4.    Ensuring customer needs are met while at the same time providing
                                   solicitation documents that are legally sufficient and crafted to derive the
                                   best value for the state.
b. What is included?          1.   Recommend, and apply the appropriate method of solicitation, evaluating
                                   the risk associated with the contract, advertising format, insurance
                                   requirements, and methods of compensation.
                             2.    Consultation with client state agencies to mutually develop procurement
                                   timeline.
                             3.    Review and provide feedback to agency representative on draft
                                   documents provided by the customer throughout the development of
                                   statement of work or specification documents.
                             4.    Conduct market research on specific commodities or services for market
                                   trends, as needed.
                             5.    In consultation with agency customer, prepare, issue, and monitor
                                   solicitations (i.e., RFPs, RFQs, invitations to bid, sole source, etc.),
                                   including addenda as required.
                             6.    Plan, coordinate and lead pre-bid and pre-proposal conferences;
                                   interpret procurement regulations and answer questions about solicitation
                                   process.
                             7.    Serve as chair of evaluation and negotiation committees, in compliance
                                   with state and federal rules and regulations.
                             8.    Assess, determine, and prepare recommendation on the validity of offers’
                                   protests.
                             9.    Examine and evaluate solicitation responses and ensure successful
                                   completion of the contractor selection process.
                              10. Review and develop contractual provisions based upon program
                                   requirements to minimize risk to the State of Oregon and facilitate
                                   Attorney General's approval when required.
                              11. Confer with client agencies, concerning contract terms and conditions.
                              12. Devise negotiating strategies with goals and alternatives.
                              13. Perform contract administration responsibilities, including:




                                                                                                              Page 9 of 28
                                         «         Renew contracts after review from agency and attains mutual
                                                   agreement between client agency and supplier.
                                         ¢         Work with agency to resolve contractor performance issues.
                                         ¢         Prepare contract amendments, extensions, or change orders
                                                   ensuring compliance with original solicitation and contract
                                                   requirements.
                                         e
                                    Manage contract terminations and contract breach actions.
c. What is not          PS does not provide the following to agencies:
included in the             1. Technical specifications for products of services
service?                       Legal advice


                           NOP& Ph
                                         Authority to conduct special procurements
                                         Designations of agency DPO's
                                         Budget expenditure approval to conduct procurement
                                         Acceptance of deliverables, products, or services
                                         Management of invoicing and payment processes
d. Offerings and        A variety of options exist for meeting agency procurement and contracting needs.
options                 These include:
                            1.       Agency specific solicitation services that are all encompassing and may
                                     include one of these specific solicitation methods:
                                       a) Request for Proposal (RFP)
                                       b) Request for Quote (RFQ)
                                       c) Invitation to Bid (ITB)
                                       d) Special Procurement
                                       e) Sole Source
                            2.       PS provides procurement services that do not require a new solicitation.
                                         These include:
                                             a) Contract administration activities for contracts not established by
                                                PS, including:
                                                        e   Amendments to existing contracts
                                                        e    Reinstatement of expired contracts
                                                        e    Retroactive approval of certain procurement actions
                                                        e    Review of contractual terms and conditions
                                                   )   Interagency (IAA) and inter-governmental (IGA) agreements
                                             Oo




                                                   )   Draft and execute OregonForward contracts
                                             om?)




                                                   )   Direct awards based on $10k threshold
                                              e)       Issuance of work orders or purchase orders against existing contracts
e. Service              Customers must be an agency of the State of Oregon who are subject to DAS
Prerequisites           procurement statues and administrative rules; or otherwise, be able to delegate
                        such authority to PS.
f. (Service-specific)   PS responsibilities:
Customer and                         e         Procurement expertise that matches the correct skill level to the
provider                                       request
responsibilities                     e         Timely response to customer request and timeline creation
                                               Document management and version control during the procurement
                                               process
                                               Post final contract and related documents in OregonBuys
                                               Provide master contract file maintenance and retention
                                               Inclusion of Risk Management and DOJ when necessary
                                               Ensure EIS approvals are obtained when required

                        Customer responsibilities:
                                     e         ITl and business case development for information technology
                                               procurements
                                               Submit request for PS in the prescribed manner
                                     e         Provide statement of work, technical specifications, and/ or
                                               description of deliverables




                                                                                                                     Page   10 of 28
                                 e    Determine schedule of payments
                                 e    Provide agency single point of contact to PS for the solicitation
                                      process
                                 e    Provide primary agency contacts for contract administration issues
                                      post contract execution
                                 e    Attend kick-off meeting, identify and invite agency resources such as
                                      agency procurement staff, subject matter experts and program
                                      managers
                                 e    Respond timely to requests for information
                                 e    Review and approve documents as requested
                                 e    Participate in vendor conferences, proposal evaluations, and contract
                                      negotiations as requested / needed
                                 e    Ensure budget authority to enter resulting contracts and to pay for
                                      any reviews requested or required of DOJ / PS



a. How is this service   Customers must request services through the submission of a requisition (REQ)
requested?               through OregonBuys: hittps://oregonbuys.gov

b. When can you          Step                                          Service Expectation
expect to have your      Acknowledge    receipt of service request   | 2 business day from
service request                                                        submission
fulfilled?               Assign PS staff resource                     4 business days from
                                                                      submission
                         Assigned PS staff Initial contact with       7 business days from
                         requester                                    submission
                         Request fulfilled                            Completion date will be based on
                                                                      approved project timeline as mutually
                                                                      agreed by PS and the requester.




a. Self-service             e General Information:
support                       https ://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/Index.aspx
                            e Public Contracting Code, Rules and Policies:
                              httos://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/Authlaw.aspx
                            e Forms, Templates and Guidelines:
                              httos://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/library.aspx
                            e Oregon Procurement Manual:
                              httops://www.oregon.gov/das/opm/Pages/Index.aspx
b. How to request
                         Contact us by email: EGS.PSCustomerCare@das.oregon.gov
support
c. When can you          Within two business days.
expect a response?



 2 — Statewide Price Agreements




                                                                                                      Page   11 of 28
a. Service Summary     PS maintains a portfolio of approximately 430 Statewide Price Agreements and
                       multi-jurisdictional cooperative procurements. These agreements are readily
                       available to authorized agencies via the OregonBuys system and offer:
                            1) Pricing that is based on volume discounts achieved from leveraging the
                                   state's buying power across the enterprise.
                             2)    Contracts that are continually managed to ensure the most strategic
                                   sourcing and efficient supply chain management possible.
                             3)    Ability to quickly procure needed goods and services without having to
                                   conduct lengthy procurement processes.
b. What is included?   1.    Access to a portfolio of established Statewide Price Agreements and multi-
                             jurisdictional cooperative procurements that cover a broad spectrum of
                             frequently used services and supplies in these general categories which is
                             not an all-inclusive list as new agreements are added over time:
                                  a. Services: Travel Management, Vehicle Rentals, Airfare, Lodging,
                                        Financial Services, Accounts Receivable / Debt Collection, Asset
                                        Related Equipment Inventory or Relocation, Disposal/ Recycling,
                                        Business Continuity, Disaster Recovery, Real Estate and Leasing
                                        Services. Auditing, Project Quality Assurance, Consultation, Contract
                                        Printing, Exam Certification, Facilitation, Interpretation / Translation;
                                        Transcription, Legal Services, Marketing, Staffing and Training
                                   b.   Commodities:     Environment, Food, Textiles, Laboratory Equipment,
                                        Mailing Equipment, Medical & Dental Supplies, Pharmaceuticals,
                                        Public Safety Equipment, Supplies, janitorial Supplies, Auto Related
                                        Equipment, Fuel, Lubricants, Restaurant Equipment,        Pain, Vehicles,
                                        and some may include services.
                                   c.   Information Technology: Audio / Video, Copiers, Hardware, SaaS,
                                        Services, Software and Telecom.
                                   d.   Construction & Facilities: Building Maintenance, Building Repair,
                                        Electrical, Facilities, Fire / Security, HVAC, Janitorial Services,
                                      Landscaping, Plumbing, Signage, Architectural and Engineering
                                      services (A&E), and A&E related services.
                       2.     Procurements that are in compliance with state and federal rules and
                              regulations and that have been approved for legal sufficiency by DOJ.
                       3.    Contract administration, supplier performance audits, and supplier price
                             compliance reviews.
c. What is not         PS Statewide Price Agreements do not provide the following to agencies:
included in the               1.   Ability to negotiate agency specific terms and conditions that materially
service?                           differ from those in the price agreement.
                             2.    Procurement transactions (i.e., purchase order, work orders, etc.). If an
                                   agency desires these services, please see service sheet for agency
                                   specific procurements.
                             3.    Acceptance of deliverables, products, or services.
                             4.    Management of invoicing and payment processes.
d. Offerings and            Electronic access to a wide variety of established Statewide Price Agreements,
options                     including multi-state cooperative agreements.
e. Service                  e Customers must be an agency of the State of Oregon whose procurement
prerequisites                 authority is under DAS rules or a member of the Oregon Cooperative
                              Procurement Program (ORCPP).
                            e Access to OregonBuys eProcurement System: https://oregonbuys.gov




                                                                                                           Page   12 of 28
f. (Service-specific)        PS responsibilities:
Customer and                           e   Maintain availability of Statewide Price Agreements and cooperative
provider                                   procurement contracts for critical goods and services.
responsibilities                       e   Maximize agencies involvement in evaluating Statewide Price
                                           Agreements.
                                       e   Conduct thought determination processes to determine if Statewide
                                           Price Agreements are the best mechanism for specific needs.
                                       e   Inclusion of Risk Management, DOJ, and EIS when necessary.
                                       e   Ongoing contract administration and vendor relationship
                                           management.
                            Customer responsibilities:
                                   e  Follow prescribed processes in each Statewide Price Agreement for
                                     ordering supplies/ services under a specific agreement.
                                       e   Remain within the agency’s procurement authority in accessing
                                           services supplies under Statewide Price Agreements. If it exceeds
                                           agency’s procurement authority, submit request for procurement
                                           services in the prescribed manner.
                                           Respond timely to requests for information.
                                           Provide feedback and documentation on vendor performance to PS.
                                           Participate in resolving disputes between vendors and agency.
                                           Customers must have budget authority to enter resulting contracts.




a. How is this service     | Statewide Price Agreements are accessed through OregonBuys:
requested?                  https://oregonbuys.gov.
                            To access services, go to OregonBuys and use the search function to find the
                            price agreement.
b. When can you              Step                                        Service Expectation
expect to have your         Ongoing                                      Ongoing access to existing Statewide
service request                                                          Price Agreements
fulfilled?




a. Self-service                 e   General Information: PS Website
support                             https ://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/Index.aspx
                                e   Price agreements access: htips://oregonbuys.gov
                                e   Review Buyer’s Guide instructions provided with most price agreements
                                e   Contact the DAS contract administrator listed in OregonBuys
b. How to request
                             Contact us by email: EGS.PSCustomerCare@das.oregon.gov
support
c. When can you
                            Within two business days
expect a response?




 3 — Procurement        Consultation




a. Service Summary        | PS provides consultation services to DAS divisions and customer agencies to
                            facilitate the procurement process. Consultation can be part of a full procurement
                            process managed      by PS, or a stand-alone service provided to the customer.




                                                                                                           Page   13 of 28
                       Technical assistance can include, but is not limited to, generation of reports,
                       market analysis, process mentorship, or problem research and resolution.
b. What is included?       1) Assisting in the design, development, and implementation of procurement
                               strategies
                           2) Strategic sourcing - helping customers identify available
                               sources for their procurement needs (i.e., Statewide Price Agreements,
                               cooperative procurements, etc.)
                           3) Contract terms / conditions review
                           4) Contract administration assistance / supplier relationship management -
                               strategies to identify relationship needs & conflict resolution management
                           5) Market research
                           6) Mentoring on procurement processes
c. What is not         Consultation services do not include:
included in the            1) Conducting solicitation processes (RFP, ITB, etc.)
service?                   2) Providing legal advice
                           3) Delegating procurement authority
                           4)   Designations of agency DPO's
                           5)   Budget / expenditure approval to conduct procurement
                           6)   Acceptance of deliverables, products, or services
                           7)   Management of invoicing and payment processes
                           8)   Active contract administration
                           9)   Development or approval of agency internal procurement policies
d. Offerings and       Consultation assistance can be requested in three general ways:
options                    1)   Informal requests for information or clarification sent via e-mail or via
                                phone to PS staff.
                          2)    Formal requests for documents review, strategy sessions, on-site
                                consultations, etc.
                          3)    As part of an agency specific procurement process in which PS is
                                conducting the procurement.
                                e Additional Service: PS can issue a RFI to the vendor community to
                                   assist agencies in gathering information and determining potential
                                 opportunities and costs for specific needs.
e. Service             Requestor needs to be an agency of the State of Oregon or one of its political
prerequisites          sub-divisions.




                                                                                                        Page   14 of 28
f. (Service-specific)    PS Responsibilities:
Customer and                     Informal Request:
provider                         e    Respond to informal customer inquiries within two business days.
responsibilities                 e    Take responsibility for information we provide.

                                  Formal Request:
                                 e    Acknowledge request within two business days.
                                 e    Review and approve documents as requested within timeframes
                                      mutually agreed upon with customer.
                                 e    Take responsibility for information we provide.
                                 e    Refer customers to other resources if need is outside of our service
                                      line (PS Policy office, DOJ, etc.).

                         Customer Responsibilities:
                                 Informal Request:
                                 e    Initiate request for consultative services.
                                 e    Provide as much detail as possible related to the issue you are
                                      requesting consultation about in order to expedite response.

                                  Formal Request:
                                 e    Submit formal request for consultative services. Request should be
                                      submitted as outlined in section 2(b).
                                 e    Attend meetings.
                                 e    Identify agency resources such as agency procurement staff, subject
                                      matter experts and program managers.
                                 e    Respond timely to requests for information.
                                      Review and approve documents as requested.



a. How is this service   For informal consultations, customers may contact PS via e-mail at
requested?               EGS.PSCustomerCare@das.oregon.qov

                         For formal consultation requests:
                         Customers must request services through the submission of a requisition (REQ)
                         through the OregonBuys system.
                         e    lf you need OregonBuys assistance submitting a request, contact the
                             OregonBuys help desk at epro-support@periscopeholdings.com.
b. When can you                                     Informal Consultation Request
expect to have your      Step                                       Service Expectation
service request          Acknowledge receipt of service request | 2 business days from submission
fulfilled?
                                                    Formal Consultation Requests
                         Assign PS staff resource                   4 business days from submission
                         Assigned PS staff initial contact with     7 business days from submission
                         requestor
                         Request fulfilled                          Completion date will be based on
                                                                    approved project timeline as mutually
                                                                    agreed by PS and the requestor




                                                                                                        Page   15 of 28
a. Self-service        PS website:
support                    e   General Information:
                               https ://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/Index.aspx
                            e        Public Contracting Code, Rules, and Policies:
                                     https ://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/Authlaw.aspx
                            e        Forms, templates, and guidelines:
                                     https ://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/library.aspx
                            e        OregonBuys support email:
                                     epro-support@periscopeholdings.com
b. How to request      E-mail: EGSPSCustomerCare@das.oregon.gov
support                Phone: 503-378-4642

                       For formal consultation requests already assigned to a PS staff resource, please
                       contact that person directly. See the staff phone list on our website:
                       https://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/Teams.aspx

c. When can you
expect a response?     Responses to initial inquiries can be expected within two business days.




 4-Training & certification services



a. Service Summary     PS provides Oregon specific public procurement related training and customized
                       training services to state and local government personnel who have procurement,
                       purchasing and contract administration responsibilities in their daily work. The
                       program also maintains an Oregon credentialing program that has the goals of
                                1)   Improving the skills of public employees who spend public funds on
                                     goods and services, and
                                2)   Educating on procurement practices that promote fair, transparent, and
                                     responsible business practices consistent with Oregon Statutes and
                                     Administrative Rules.
b. What is included?   1)       Delivery of procurement training to a multitude of audiences using a variety of
                                mechanisms:
                                e    Currently provide 132 contract hours of training on specific aspects of
                                     Oregon public procurement as mandated in ORS 279A.159 which is
                                     continually updated as new trainings are available.
                                e    Training is delivered via various media to include live instructor led online
                                     webinars, asynchronous online and in-person live instructor delivered
                                     content.
                                e    All training is offered through the state's learning management system,
                                     Workday Learning.
                       2)       Training materials to include student guides, exercise sheets and
                                supplemental handouts are available online via Adobe Connect virtual
                                classrooms for online webinars or the Articulate online training development
                                software in Workday Learning
                       3)       Audiences include procurement staff, administrative staff, and program and
                                project managers
                       4)       Testing and certification programs that offer three legislative mandated
                                certificates of completion and three competency-based public procurement
                                certifications tied to the tiered delegation program:
                                e    Certificates of completion
                                          ©    Contract Administration Training Certificate
                                         o      Principles of Public Procurement
                                         o      Fundamentals of Procurement




                                                                                                           Page   16 of 28
                            eCompetency-based certifications:
                                 o  Oregon Procurement Basic Certification (OPBC)
                                 o  Oregon Procurement Intermediate Certification (OPIC)
                                 o  Oregon Procurement Advanced Certification (OPAC)
                   5)   Specialized workshops flexibly adapted to specific needs
                   6)   Consultation services regarding procurement training:
                        e   Training program development for local, agency, and other states.
                        e       Certification strategies for local, agency, and other states.
                        e       Agency specific procurement training development and delivery by the
                                PS Training Team.

                   Procurement Certification Program Details:
                   httos://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/TrainingCertification.aspx

                   Procurement training development standards
                   https://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/trainingdev.aspx
c. What is not     1.   Core classes for other credentialing organizations
included in the    2.   Development and delivery of customer specific course content not related to
service?                Oregon public procurement
                   3.   Procurement policy determinations
                   4.   Legal advice
d. Offerings and   Visit the PS training calendar webpage for current training offerings:
options            https://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/Training.aspx

                   Oregon Procurement Certification program:
                   Available certificates of completion and certifications:
                        e   Oregon Project Management Certification Program (OPMCP)
                            DAS PS - Demystifying Terms and Conditions
                            DAS PS - Principles of Public Procurement WEBINAR
                            DAS PS - Using Statewide Price Agreements
                            DAS SPO - Writing a Statement of Work
                                DAS - PS Procurement Rules
                                Procurement Rules Briefing
                                DAS - PS - 2020 Procurement Rules Briefing (Recorded)
                                DAS - PS - 2021 Procurement Rules Briefing (Recorded)
                                DAS   PS Procurement Rules Briefing
                                DAS PS - Fundamentals of Sustainable Procurement
                                DAS PS - Market Research in Public Procurement
                                DAS - PS - Small Procurements
                                DAS - PS - Contract Administration Training Certificate
                                DAS - PS Audits
                                DAS - PS - Oregon Public Procurement Certification Program Overview
                                2022 (Recorded)
                                DAS - PS Contract Remedies
                                DAS - PS - Procurement Rules
                                DAS - PS Contract Closeout
                                DAS - PS Procurement Ethics
                                DAS - PS Introduction to Negotiations
                                DAS - PS Administering Contracts and Managing Vendors
                                DAS   - PS   Introduction to Contract Administration
                                DAS   - PS   Amendments and Change Orders
                                DAS   - PS   Accepting Goods and Services & Paying Contractors
                                DAS   - PS   Develop a Contract Administration Plan (CAP)
                                DAS   - PS   - Procurement Preferences
                                DAS   - PS   - Introducing the Certification Office for Business Inclusion and



                                                                                                       Page   17 of 28
                                  Diversity - Oregon Procurement
                             e    DAS-PS-Understanding and Utilization of Certification Office for Business
                                  Inclusion & Diversity (COBID) Certified Firms
                             e    DAS - PS - Statewide Policy and Procedure for Business Equity,
                                  Inclusion and Engagement in Public Procurement
                                  DAS - PS - Competencies and the Procurement Professional Live Webinar
                                  DAS - PS - Pay Equity 2017 Protected Class
                                  DAS - PS - Prevailing Wage
                                  DAS    - Risk Management - Risk Insurance Assessment Tool
                                  DAS    - PS - Principles of Public Procurement: Risk Management      1
                                  DAS    - PS - Principles of Public Procurement: Risk Management      2
                                  DAS    - PS - Principles of Public Procurement: Risk Management      3
                                  DAS    - PS - Principles of Public Procurement: Risk Management      4
                                  DAS    - PS - Principles of Public Procurement: Risk Management      5
                                  DAS    PS Fundamentals of Procurement-WEBINAR
                                  DAS    PS - Legislative Updates and Working with COBID Firms
                                  (Governor's Marketplace) 2018
                             e   DAS - PS - OregonBuys Basic Procurement User Training (Bid
                                 Solicitation & MBPO) Live Webinar
e. Service               Requestor needs to be an employee of the State of Oregon or of one of its
prerequisites            political sub-divisions.
f. (Service-specific)    PS training program responsibilities:
Customer and                 e    Create quality curriculum on procurement statutes, rules and best
provider                          practices governing public procurement in Oregon
responsibilities             e    Provide quality instruction related to public contracting laws and
                                  procurement policies that apply to all public entities subject to the Oregon
                                  procurement code
                             e    Maintain up to date course descriptions and class schedules on the
                                  state's Workday learning system
                             e    Provide class materials
                             e    Provide classroom space (in person or virtually)
                             e    Hold courses as scheduled, or timely notice of any logistic changes or
                                  class cancellations
                             e    Administer certification and credentials program and grant Oregon
                                  procurement credentials to individuals meeting program requirements
                         Customer responsibilities:
                             e  Manager approval for enrollment / cancellation in classes through
                                Workday Learning (includes payment).
                             e  Reporting self-reported learning events and tracking / monitoring
                                  credentials in Workday Learning.
                             e    Track expiration dates and timely request renewal and recertification.
                             e    Access to browsers or other technical requirements needed to complete
                                  class e-assignments, tests, or to access online resources per
                                  instructions.



                             e    Registering for training courses and managing enrollment is through the
a. How is this service            Workday Learning enrollment process.
requested?                   e    Request for consultation services is accomplished by contacting PS
                                  training staff directly (see 3b).
                             e    Workday Learning is available to state and local agency staff through
b. What forms are                 logon accounts. The Workday Learning system is accessed at:
used /needed to                   https ://wd5.myworkday.com/oregon
request this service?        e    Requests for consultation services can be made via phone or e-mail (see
                                  3b).



                                                                                                           Page   18 of 28
c. When can you            e   Workday Learning sends automated e-mail notices once course
expect to have your            registration or cancellation is requested.
service request            e   Initial requests for consultation services will be responded to within two
fulfilled?                     business days.



a. Self-service            e   Course registration and enrollment management are self-support
support                        activities through Workday Learning: https://wd5.myworkday.com/oregon
                           e   For assistance in navigating Workday Learning, see the guides:
                               https ://www.oreqon.gov/das/HR/Pages/WDL%20Resources.aspx
                           e   Requests for consultative services can be made by contacting any of the
                               PS training staff directly. See current PS staff roster linked in 3b below
b. How to request          e   Workday Learning: For assistance with your login ID or password, you
support                        can contact your agency Workday technical and HR contact
                               https ://www.oreqon.gov/das/HR/Pages/Workday-Learning.aspx
                           e   To request consultative services or to share concerns about the PS
                               training program, contact program staff directly. The current PS staff
                               roster is located at:
                               https ://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/Teams.aspx
c. When can you            e   Response times for Workday Learning requests for assistance are not
expect a response?             managed by PS
                           e   Responses to inquiries made to PS training staff will be made within two
                               business days.


 5 — Access to Enterprise eProcurement System



a. Service Summary     The OregonBuys system is Oregon's #1 resource for accessing public agency
                       procurement opportunities. Most state agencies and many local governments use
                       OregonBuys to reach suppliers in order to procure goods and services.
                       OregonBuys is the means by which agencies advertise procurement
                       opportunities, meeting the requirements of Oregon's public contracting code.
b. What is included?      e    Aweb-based tool with access to Statewide Price Agreements and agency
                               specific offerings
                          e    Ameans to advertise procurement opportunities to the public that meets
                               the requirements of Oregon's public contracting code reporting for Green,
                               COBID and other initiative participation
                          e    E-mail notifications of solicitation opportunities. Electronic bid submission
                               for certain opportunity types
                          e    Tutorials for new users
                          e    OA Roundtables
                          e    Quarterly all day OregonBuys training for new users
                          e    Online training manuals
                          e    Visibility to registered, certified COBID suppliers
                          e    Vendor OregonBuys training which assists agencies in expanding their
                               vendor pool
                          e    Agency based activity reporting
                          e    Help desk support available Monday thru Friday
c. What is not
included in the        System customization
service?




                                                                                                     Page   19 of 28
d. Offerings and
options                    Permissions based on the role and authority of individual users

e. Service                                                ;          a
prerequisites              Full access to OregonBuys requires establishing a user account

f. (Service-specific)     PS OregonBuys program responsibilities:
Customer and                   e   Provide access to procurement and contracting information issued by the
provider                           state of Oregon, local governments, and political subdivisions
responsibilities               e   Support and maintain system
                               e   Provide online resources, including tutorials and other self-help tools
                               e   Provide a high level of support/ training to OA so that they are able to
                                   manage their agency users
                               e   Submit annual reports for posting on the Oregon transparency website
                               e   Support end users without an OA through the help desk
                               e   Monitor and maintain COBID and SFMS data import
                          Customer responsibilities:
                              e  OA are expected to attend OA council meetings as requested and remain
                                 up to date on system changes and procedures
                               e   Provide at least one DPO to process approval step for the agency. Follow
                                   all systems guidelines
                               e   Use the system according to rule and policy




a. How is this service   | Access for agency users of OregonBuys requires establishing a user account. To
requested?                request a user account, contact your agency OA.

                           If you’re unsure who your agency OA is, contact the OregonBuys help desk at
                          epro-support@periscopeholdings.com for assistance.
b. What forms are                                                               ,         ,
used / needed to           Contact the OregonBuys help desk at epro-support@periscopeholdings.com for
request this service?    | assistance.

c. When can you                e   Requests for OregonBuys help desk services made during help desk
expect to have your                business hours will be responded to within two business days
service request                e   Requests to OA's responses will be based on individual agency
fulfilled?                         procedure




a. Self-service                e   See PS OregonBuys webpage at: https://oregonbuys.gov
support                        e   Register for OregonBuys training via Workday Learning. For more
                                   information visit the Workday Learning website at:
                                   https ://wd5.myworkday.com/oregon
b. How to request         Contact the OregonBuys help desk:
support                   By email: Send an email to epro-support@periscopeholdings.com. Please be
                          sure to include your company / organization name in your message so that we
                          can easily find your account in OregonBuys.
                           By phone:   1-888-472-9102.

                           Response to email and voice mail will occur M-F, 7:30am -4:30pm
c. When can you
expect a response?        OregonBuys help desk initial response time is within 45 minutes of the request.




                                                                                                        Page 20 of 28
 6 — Embedded     procurement staff



a. Service Summary      PS can provide staff to embed into your team, working as the procurement
                        expert with your permanent staff for the purpose of conducting complex project
                        specific procurements on behalf of your agency, or for the purpose of developing
                        and strengthening the procurement expertise of an agency's internal
                        procurement staff.

                        From a partial embed (project specific, less than full time) to a yearlong, full-time
                        engagement, PS can provide fully qualified and credentialed state procurement
                        analysts and procurement and contract specialist that enable you to meet your
                        business needs.
b. What is included?    Different from a job rotation, an embedded PS employee would conduct their
                        work under their DAS procurement authority, continue to report to PS and
                        remain an integral part of the PS team.
                        Embedding offers a physical presence of a PS expert within your agency to
                        provide services and expertise that may include, but are not limited to, the
                        following:
                             e           Lead across-functional procurement team to plan and develop
                                         procurement strategies that meet agency business needs and result in
                                         procurement processes and contracts that are compliant with all public
                                         contracting statutes and administrative rules.
                             e           Devise negotiation strategies and serve as chair of evaluation and
                                         negotiation committees to obtain consensus on selection of contractors.
                             e           Advise and mentor agency management and procurement staff in best
                                         practice methods of conducting procurement.
c. What is not          Factors Affecting Availability
included in the         Due to the limited availability of this service, PS managers will evaluate our
service?                ability to fulfill each request for the assignment of embedded staff based on the
                        following factors:
                             1) The number of PS employees currently on embed assignments
                             2) The specific customer needs, including:
                                 e    Duration of the requested assignment
                                         e   Specific skill sets required for the assignment
                                         e   % FTE needed (full time, half-time, etc.).
                             3)          Consider different PS employee’s strengths and in depth knowledge of
                                         specific sourcing areas (i.e., |.T., Transportation, etc.)
                             4)          Potential impact to PS operations and enterprise-wide service delivery
                                         should the request be fulfilled
                        Tasks/ Services out-of-scope
                              1)         Developing business case for the procurement project
                             2)          Procurement project staff augmentation unrelated to a specific project or
                                         unrelated to development of the agency's procurement expertise
                                    )    Providing legal advice
                            OW




                                    )    Delegating procurement authority
                              MD O1 fF
                            CON




                                    )    Designating an agency DPO
                                    )    Budget/ expenditure approval to conduct procurement
                                    )    Accepting deliverables, products, or services
                                    )    Managing   invoice and payment processes




                                                                                                           Page 21 of 28
d. Offerings and            Each request to embed PS staff into other agencies requires unique negotiation
options                     and customization of the services to be provided, time commitments, level of
                            expertise needed, etc. The service plan will reflect the specificity of the
                            engagement the requesting agency has in mind, and therefore does not lend
                            itself to a service catalog menu of offerings and options.
e. Service                  Customer agency and PS will enter into an IAA for the provision of
prerequisites               embedded procurement services staff. Agreement must be approved by the
                            State Chief Procurement Officer, DAS CHRO, and the appropriate staff at
                            the requesting agency.

f. (Service specific)       Customer will provide day to day direction and workload management of the
Customer and                embedded employee. Other customer and provider responsibilities will be
provider                    defined in the interagency agreement that will articulate the specific details of
responsibilities            each engagement.




a. How is this              Requests for embedded DAS PS staff should be made directly to the State Chief
requested?                  Procurement Officer. Visit this webpage for contact information:
                            https://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/Teams.aspx
b. What forms are           Initial request can be made in person, or via e-mail. The process to refine the
used / needed to            request will involve written communications, and face to face meetings, that
request this service?       ultimately result in an IAA.
c. When can you
expect to have your
                            Initial acknowledgement of the request will be within one business day.
service request
fulfilled?




a. Self-service             Contact the State Chief Procurement Officer for assistance with embedded
support                     staffing needs.
b. How to request           Contact the State Chief Procurement Officer for assistance with embedded
support                     staffing needs.
c. When can you
expect a response?          Initial response within one business day.



7 — Procurement policy services




a. Service              Approves special requests, provides policy guidance, develops administrative rules,
summary                 provides consultation services, legislative tracking, and implementation. These
                        services are paid by assessment to the agency.
b. What is              Requests for:
included?                   e   Special procurement
                            e   Exemption on construction procurement
                            e   Delegation of procurement authority
                            e   Assistance with policy matters
c. What is not
included in the         Legal advice and agency specific policy advice is not included in this service.
service?
d. Offerings and        See 2a below



                                                                                                          Page 22 of 28
   options




   a. How is this         Requests for delegation, requests for special procurement, and exemptions are
   requested?             submitted through OregonBuys. Agencies should navigate to the DAS On Behalf of
                          Organization in OregonBuys and submit an Open Market Requisition, selecting the
                          appropriate request type from the “Type of Request” dropdown.

                          Please refer to these instructions:
                          https://www.oregon.gov/das/ORBuys/Documents/OregonBuySsDAS          OBO    Guide.docx

   b. What forms are
                          Special procurement and delegation forms are posted on our website:
   used / needed to
                          https://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/ReqstSvcs.aspx
   request this
   service?
   c. Whencan you       | Step                                         Service Expectation
   expect to have         Acknowledge receipt of service request       2 business days from
   your service                                                        submission
   request fulfilled?     [Assign PS staff resource                    4 business days from
                                                                       submission
                          Assigned PS staff Initial contact with       7 business days from
                          requester                                    submission
                          Request fulfilled                            Completion date will be based on
                                                                       approved project timeline as mutually
                                                                       agreed by PS and the requester.




   a. Self-service           e General Information:
   support                     https ://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/Index.aspx
                             e Public Contracting Code, Rules and Policies:
                               https ://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/Authlaw.aspx
                             e Forms, Templates and Guidelines:
                               httos://www.oregon.gov/das/Procurement/Pages/library.aspx
                             e Oregon Procurement Manual:
                               httos://www.oregon.gov/das/opm/Pages/Index.aspx

   b. How to request
                          Contact us by email: EGS.PSCustomerCare@das.oregon.gov
   support
   c. When can you
   expect a               Within two business days.
   response?


        7.2 SLA performance measure data dictionaries

SLA Metric #1: Percent of agency specific procurements completed within the published
baseline timeframes.

    .        Description: Percent of times PS completes Agency Specific procurements
             within the baseline timeframes for procurement type.
    .        Purpose: This measure is tracked to ensure that Agency Specific procurements




                                                                                                          Page 23 of 28
                are completed within the baseline timeframes published by PS for procurement
                completion.
    °           Comparability: Many divisions or programs within DAS track similar timeliness
                performance measures, which allows for comparability of performance between
                different units / service providers within DAS;
                     o   ETS tracks and reports tracks and reports the percent of times the division is
                         able to meet the delivery date for standard service requests.
                     o   DAS Maintenance Services tracks and reports the percent of times the
                         program is able to meet the delivery date for maintenance projects.
                     o   DAS Publishing and Distribution tracks and reports the percent of times
                         the program is able to meet delivery date for printing and / or mailing
                         jobs.
        ¢       Measure calculation formula:
                   o       Az=(B/C) *100
                   o       B= Number of procurements completed during the measuring period in which the date
                           of completion preceded or met the published baseline processing time,
                   o       C=Number of procurements completed during measuring period.
        ¢       Detailed measure definition / clarification:
                       o    Baseline timeframe is the average transaction processing time (by
                            transaction type) established by PS and published on our website, in
                            which PS will deliver to the requesting agency a completed, legally
                            sufficient, contract.
                                 1. The transaction processing time begins on the date when a customer
                                      submits a complete Requisition to PS via OregonBuys. The
                                      transaction processing time ends when PS delivers to the requesting
                                      agency a completed, legally sufficient, contract.
                                 2. Time periods of when projects are on hold due to customer agency
                                      requests will not be included in the calculated transaction processing
                                      times.
                                 3. Any delays in the processing times that did not result from agency customer
                                      requests will be included in the calculated transaction processing times.
                                      Examples include:
                                           ¢   Changes to the scope of the solicitation request not directly
                                               related to a change in the scope communicated by the
                                               customer agency.
                                           ¢   Delays to the award process as a result of vendor protests.
                                           ¢   Delays in legal or other required reviews.
                       o    This performance measure will be tracked with the aid of PS workload
                            tracking system or a similar Excel or database file allowing program staff to
                            enter the Requisition received date and contract award date.
            ¢    Baseline: As published on PS website. Updated annually.
            ¢   SLE (Quantitative performance target): 85%.
            ¢   Frequency of reporting/ measurement period: Quarterly.
            ¢   Attachments: None.



SLA Metric #2: OregonBuys help desk effectiveness.




                                                                                                           Page 24 of 28
      Description: Average rating of OregonBuys help desk staff effectiveness as per
     Customer        survey.


      Purpose: The objective for this measure is to track effectiveness of OregonBuys help
     desk in providing support to service requests received from customer agencies, and
     vendors.

     lt is expected that tracking and reporting on this measure will help PS make data-
     driven decisions regarding:
           o   Working with OregonBuys vendor to enforce contractual service level requirements.
           o   Technical support workflow / processes.
          o        Resource / workload balancing.
          Oo       Improve system user training and guidance documents.
     Comparability: No reliable organization or data source for comparison has
     been identified at this time.

     Measure          calculation formula:
         Oo        A=)B/n (number of evaluation surveys)
         o         Bz Rating (in a scale of 1-10, with 10 being the best) to specific question
                   on "was your question or concern resolved, or were you referred to the
                   appropriate contact who could?" included on transactional surveys sent to
                   agency customers and vendors who have contacted PS OregonBuys help
                   desk to request support.
                   n= Number of surveys completed by agency customers in the measurement
                   period.
                   Results (score on "effectiveness of OregonBuys help desk" question) from all
                   surveys received in the measurement period will be added up and divided by
                   the total number of surveys received to calculate the average rating for.
¢     Detailed measure definition / clarification:
               O     This performance measure is tracked as a customer satisfaction
                     survey.
               O     The survey tool is managed and deployed by PS.
               O     Surveys are sent weekly to all PS agency customers and vendors who
                     have requested assistance from the OregonBuys help desk in the
                     preceding week.
                     Customers and vendors who contact the support desk multiple times in
                     a survey period will receive only one survey and will respond
                     cumulatively.
                     Results are compiled quarterly and reported on the PS performance
                     metric dashboard. OregonBuys Program administrator will use the data
                     to work with OregonBuys vendor and PS management to refine program
                     outcomes.

«     Exclusions:        None.


                       What is Tracked                            What is Not Tracked
    All service requests from vendors,              All service requests from local governments,
    ORCPP          members,    and end-users from   school districts, etc.




                                                                                                   Page 25 of 28
       state agencies irrespective of the reason    All service requests from members of the general
       for contacting the OregonBuys help desk.     |public.

          Baseline: None.
          SLE (quantitative performance target): 9 (in a 10-point scale).
          Frequency of reporting / timeliness: Quarterly.
          Attachments:    None.



SLA Metric #3: Satisfaction with procurement training.

         Description: Average overall satisfaction rating on evaluation surveys completed
         by state agency employees and ORCPP members who have finished any
         procurement training course.
         Purpose: This measure tracks satisfaction with training sessions conducted by PS for
         state employees and ORCPP members.
         lt is expected that tracking and reporting on this measure will assist PS to
         understand and make data-driven decisions to develop and deliver quality training
         courses.
         Sustained procurement training quality is expected to contribute to improve the skills
         of public employees who spend public funds on goods and services, and to
         contribute to procurement practices that promote fair, transparent, and responsible
         business practices consistent with Oregon Statutes and Administrative Rules.
         Comparability:
         A few divisions or programs track the quality of the training they provide to their customers:
                     o   As part of its SLA, CHRO tracks and reports on a similar metric
                         (average satisfaction with training courses) for CHRO developed
                         training content.
                     o   As part of its SLA, DAS Risk Management tracks and reports on
                         the average rating received by attendees to safety training
                         courses.
         Measure    calculation formula:
             Oo   Az=)B/n(number of training evaluation surveys)
                     o  A=   Results (score on "overall satisfaction with training received"
                        question) from all evaluation surveys received in the designated
                         measurement period for any training course(s) delivered to state
                        employees will be added up and divided by the total number of
                        evaluation surveys received to calculate the average rating for
                        quality of training.
                     o   > = The sum of all individual ratings (B) for the procurement training
                        course.
                     o   B=  Rating (in ascale of 8 - 40, with 40 being the best) to specific
                        question on "overall satisfaction with training received" included on
                        training evaluation surveys completed by state employees who have
                        finished any procurement training course in the measurement period.




                                                                                                       Page 26 of 28
                     ©    nez=number of training evaluation surveys completed by state
                          employees in the measurement period.
                     o    This will be collected from each employee prior to course completion.
         Detailed measure definition / clarification:
             o   The Survey is composed of 8 questions, each rated on a 1-5 point scale with 5 being
                 best.
             o   Completion of evaluations at the end of each training course is required prior
                 to course completion. The data gathered will provide quantitative and
                 qualitative feedback on the training received.
         Exclusions:     None.

         Baseline: None.

        SLE (quantitative performance target): Our performance target is a rating of 4 in a 5-point
        scale, or 80% satisfaction.
         Frequency of reporting/ timeliness: Quarterly.
        Attachments:     None.



SLA Metric #4: Satisfaction with PS Customer Service & Communication.


         Description: Average overall satisfaction rating on evaluation surveys completed
         by identified Point of Contact (POC) for each Agency Specific procurement
         conducted by PS.
         Purpose: This measure tracks communication effectiveness and overall customer
         service satisfaction related to Agency Specific procurement activities conducted by
         PS for state agencies.

         lt is expected that tracking and reporting on this measure will assist PS to
         understand and make data-driven decisions in order to develop and deliver quality
         services and timely / effective communication.
         Ultimately, timely, effective, and customer focused communications and services is
         expected to contribute to improved engagements between PS and state agencies.
         Feedback and data from this measure will contribute to PS practices that promote
         transparent and responsible business practices consistent with DAS’ mission to
         serve state government.
         Comparability: None.

         Measure calculation formula:
             o   Az=(B/C)*100
                    o   Bz= Number of respondents to customer service and communication
                       evaluation survey who answer “yes” to specific question (“Did a PS
                       staff resource make initial contact with the agency requester within 7
                        business days from agency submission request?”) in the
                        measurement period.
                    o   C= Number of responses to customer service and communication
                        evaluation surveys received in the measurement period.
                    o  The number of “yes” responses to the question on the survey will be tallied up
                       and divided by the total number of surveys received, and then multiplied by 100
                       to calculate the percent figure.



                                                                                                  Page 27 of 28
        *   Detailed measure definition / clarification:
                oO   Evaluation survey distributed to ali POCs 30 days after REQ received,
                     followed by another survey at project compietion.
        ¢   Exclusions: None.
    *       Baseline: None.
    «       SLE (quantitative performance target): 80%.
    °       Frequency of reporting/ timeliness: Quarterly.
   »        Attachments: None.



   7.4 Rate methodologies
Rate methodologies:

    «       Central Government Service Charge.
            PS assesses a portion of the total costs of running PS to agencies based on the number of FTE
            positions each agency ts authorized for each biennial budget.

    *       Oregon Cooperative Procurement Program (ORCPP) User Fee.
            Biennial fee assessed to members of ORCPP based on member's total budget.

    ¢       Vendor Collected Administrative Fee (VCAF).
            Percent charged per purchases made by state agency or ORCPP members from Statewide
            Price Agreements maintained by PS. Standard VCAF rate is 2% and most cases is embedded
            Info the cost authorized purchasers pay the vendor for the requested good or service. VCAF
            fees fund the OregonBuys procurement sysiem as portions of PS operations.

    ¢       Statewide Training Pregram.
            Fee charged per attendee at PS training classes or other PS sponsored event.

    ¢       Agency Specific Transaction Fees.

    ¢       Per transaction fee charged to agencies for conducing procurement activities on
            their behalf. The fees list is published in the DAS Price List of Goods and Services
            available from the DAS Chief Finance Office.


The Fee for Service charges for each biennium are based on levels of activity in the subsequent
biennium. The charges for all DAS services are based on the projected needs of the agency's FTE
positions and current legislative approved program. If activities or levels of service change, DAS or
the agency may request renegotiation of this agreement to ensure continued uninterrupted service
and cost recovery to DAS.




                                                                                                  Page 28 of 28
