Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Plan
                                        May 2023




                   We believe that Diversity, Equity,
                      and Inclusion is necessary to
                    ensure Oregon’s diverse people
                            and businesses can do
                       meaningful work and reach
                                their full potential.
Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 2
Vision and mission
The Oregon Employment Department envisions an Oregon where meaningful work enables the
state’s diverse people and businesses to realize their full potential, creating prosperity in every
community.

Our mission is to support business and promote employment. We deliver our services in more than
40 locations in Oregon and we accomplish our mission by:
   • Supporting Oregonians and communities during times of underemployment by providing
     unemployment benefits and stabilizing economic forces.
   • Serving businesses by recruiting and referring the best-qualified applicants to jobs and
     providing resources to a cross-section of job seekers in support of their employment needs.
   • Developing and distributing quality workforce and economic information to promote
       informed decisions.
   • Providing paid leave benefits that are accessible to all and help Oregon employers and
     workers maintain quality of life, economic stability, and peace of mind.



Values, operating principles, and strategic goals
The Oregon Employment Department’s values and ways of conducting business are crucial to the
success of our programs and our entire workforce system of which we are one important part. We
commit to the following values in our work with customers, partners, tribal governments, and other
interested parties:


Integrity
We are trusted to keep our word, always acting with honesty and courage.


Respect
We value diverse perspectives, assume good intent, and act with compassion.


Community
We foster a sense of belonging for our employees, partners, and customers, creating positive
impacts where we live and work.
                 Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 1
Our work is guided by the following operating principles:
   • We are conscientious stewards of public resources.
   • We are accountable for our actions and we admit when we are wrong.
   • We are inclusive and transparent in our decision-making.
   • We seek out and form effective alliances to address community needs.
   • We promote a positive, safe, and learning environment.
   • We work hard, and we’re not afraid to laugh.

Our strategic goals are to:
   • Continually advance our partnerships and systems to provide innovative services to
     Oregon’s diverse people and businesses.
   • Engage with communities across the state to maximize awareness and use of public
     workforce resources.
   • Foster an inclusive and fair work environment where employees feel valued and supported
     in reaching their full potential.
   • Invite and retain talented, diverse people to help us exceed our customers’ expectations.



Diversity, equity, and inclusion development activities
We give all our employees, including managers and represented workers, training, education, and
development activities aimed to help them value diversity, promote inclusion, and achieve equitable
outcomes in their work. We provide a robust selection of required and optional material focused on
equity, diversity, and inclusion with our employees.


Equity and Inclusion Council
Our Equity and Inclusion Council provides a wide range of policy recommendations and learning
opportunities to the Executive Team and entire department. Division managers give council
members dedicated time to participate in council activities. Council members are invited to
participate on interview panels and workgroups on a range of topics. The council helps our
workplace be a place where individual strengths are recognized and all employees are
encouraged to contribute. Over the past several years, the council has organized a range of


                 Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 2
diversity and inclusion events and trainings, contributed to policy development, and written a number
of educational newsletters. The following courses are some of the training the council provides:


Disability awareness, accessibility, communication, and customer service
   • Required for all employees
   • Five online modules
   • Takes approximately 45-60 minutes to complete
   • At the end of the modules, participants will be able to:
       – Demonstrate increased disability awareness
       – Understand the difference between equity and equality
       – Develop strategies to communicate with and provide services to customers
         with a wide range of disabilities


Language assistance
   • Required for all employees
   • One online module
   • Takes approximately 20 minutes to complete
   • At the end of the module, participants will be able to:
       – Understand our obligation to give meaningful access to all of our customers who
         prefer a language other than English
       – Use the agency’s video and phone interpretation services and translation services


ADA Reasonable Accommodation Policy
   • Required for all employees
   • One online module and policy acknowledgment
   • Takes approximately 2 hours to complete
   • At the end of the module, participants will be able to:
       – Understand our requirements, responsibilities, and resources for reasonable
         accommodations for employees requesting accommodations and employees who
         respond to accommodations requests.

                 Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 3
Reasonable Accommodations for Customers
  • Required for all employees
  • One online module
  • Takes about 20 minutes to complete
  • At the end of the module, participants will be able to:
     – Follow best practices for providing reasonable accommodations and understand why
       they are necessary
     – Apply the Reasonable Accommodations for Customers Policy and Procedure to their role
     – Use our reasonable accommodations resources


Gender Identity and Expression Procedure
  • Required for all employees
  • One online module and policy acknowledgment
  • Takes approximately 10 minutes to complete
  • At the end of the module, participants will be able to:
     – Understand our requirements, responsibilities, and resources for providing an inclusive
       and respectful environment for our customers, employees, and contractors of all
       gender identities


Equity and Inclusion Overview
  • Required for all new employees
  • A live, 45-minute presentation for new employees
  • At the end of this presentation, participants will be able to:
     – Generally understand our equity and affirmative action goals
     – Explain the concepts of diversity, equity, and inclusion
     – Use our resources to learn more about reasonable accommodations, language access,
       affirmative action, Equity Framework, required and optional trainings, and agency policies
       and procedures related to equity and inclusion



               Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 4
Culture Matters Part 1: Managing Unconscious Bias
  • Required for all employees
  • A highly interactive, half-day training designed to help enhance cultural awareness and
    reduce any effects of unconscious bias on workplace performance
  • Includes practical strategies for improving performance when working across cultures
  • Participants draw upon research-based findings to improve their self- awareness and to
    develop the first steps to relating and working with cultural intelligence
  • At the end of this training, participants will be able to:
     – Demonstrate increased awareness of their own cultural identities
     – Understand the source of unconscious bias and its role on how we interact and work
       with others
     – Develop strategies to combat bias and to use differences to improve intercultural
       performance


Culture Matters Part 2: Bystander Intervention Skill Building
  • Required for all employees
  • A highly interactive, 7-hour training to provide tools and practice time for employees to
    address biased comments, microaggressions, or even harassment in the moment.
  • At this end of this training, participants will be able to:
     – Demonstrate skills to speak out in response to those, “Did they really just say that?!”
       moments
     – Explain strategies for receiving feedback on their own biases
     – Explain restorative approaches for improving their workplace interactions.


Conflict Transformation & Racial Equity Capacity-Building Series (required
for some agency divisions and optional for others)
  • Required for all employees within Paid Leave Oregon and Modernization
  • Required for leadership within Contributions and Recovery




               Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 5
   • A highly interactive, 18-hour training series, designed to help participants unpack and
     deepen their understanding of the physiological, psychological, interpersonal and
     institutional dynamics of conflict and structural racism.
   • At the end of this training, participants will be able to:
       – Explore ways their lives and the world have been shaped by the patterns of colonization
         and anti-Black racism.
       – Understand how they respond to conflict and what strategies can lead to productive
         outcomes.
       – Recognize what is within their power to make personal changes within systems outside
         of their control. Participants are also able to see how they can collectively create more
         human-centered relationships, programs, and systems.

Equity Circles
Our Equity and Inclusion Council developed ‘Equity Circle’ activities in early 2021. After piloting the
project for several months and recommending updates, the Executive Team unanimously adopted
the updated project for all divisions. Equity Circles are dedicated space and intentional time for
each agency team to share, discuss, and reflect on diversity, equity, and inclusion topics. By
participating in Equity Circles, employees can cultivate a supportive mindset for equitable and
inclusive practices and develop useful skills to be a change agent. The Equity and Inclusion
Council developed all project materials, including the vision, goals, framework, group agreements,
resource list, manager instructions, and participant survey.

The Equity and Inclusion Council surveyed all staff in fall 2022 to identify ongoing opportunities to
improve the work and support the psychological safety of employees from historically marginalized
communities. The Equity and Inclusion Office is responsible for monitoring participant feedback
and updating the project and resources as needed.



Diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives
We carry out our mission through our Contributions and Recovery, Paid Leave Oregon,
Unemployment Insurance, Workforce and Economic Research, and Workforce Operations
programs. Our agency programs are guided and supported by Administrative Business Services,



                 Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 6
Communications Office, Directors Office, Equity and Inclusion Office, Human Resources, IT
Services, and Modernization. Each area works to incorporate diversity, equity, and inclusion
initiatives into its work and in alignment with our Affirmative Action Plan and strategic goals.


Administrative Business Services
Administrative Business Services (ABS) is led by the Chief Financial Officer and the Deputy Chief
Financial Officer. ABS helps purchase the necessary goods and services for Oregon workers and
businesses, while making sure all employees follow policies for purchasing, have sufficient funds
to conduct business, and have adequate facilities for our on-site staff. The program’s services fall
under the following categories:
   • Financial – centralized accounting services
   • Budget – financial analysis, guidance, and leadership to make sure we stays within funding
     limitations and maximizes opportunities to serve the public
   • Procurement – centralized contracting and purchasing services
   • Property & Risk Management – centralize safety and facilities services
  
ABS is implementing Oregon’s new web-based eProcurement system, Oregon Buys, which will
automate our procurement process and increase efficiency. ABS is working with the Equity and
Inclusion Office to report on existing demographic data for our vendors. ABS will also begin
developing the infrastructure for data collection mechanisms and exploring sources to collect
vendor information and make sure there transparency in contracting and procurement processes.
ABS is adjusting internal processes and services, while engaging in conversations to address
potential unintended negative impacts on vendors.

ABS has prioritized working with vendors certified by the Certification Office for Business Inclusion
and Diversity (COBID). The primary goal of COBID is to level the playing field by giving certified
firms fair opportunity to compete for government contracts regardless of owner ethnicity, gender,
disability, or firm size. ABS developed a process for waiving vendor insurance requirements for
smaller vendors to increase equitable access for contracts with the state when this would not pose
a significant risk to the agency. ABS continues to participate in state outreach and engagement
events and promote opportunities with the Oregon Department of Administrative Services to
support and mitigate challenges for vendors, particularly vendors that are minority owned or
experience compounding challenges.



                 Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 7
The team led our 2021-2022 budget community engagement work, which was required of all
agencies as part of Oregon’s Racial Justice Council’s work to change how government listens to,
engages with, responds to, and supports Black, Indigenous, Latino/a/x/e, Asian, Pacific Islander,
and Tribal communities in Oregon. The goal is to keep equity and racial justice at the core of our
decision-making models. The team focused on Paid Leave Oregon and hosted ten community
engagement sessions during spring 2021. Most of the feedback from the sessions for policy pack-
age and budget development was to clarify the program’s objectives and suggestions for more
education and outreach, such as:
   • Ensuring access for those with language access needs; concerns about their own legal
     immigration status or those in their household; access to and ability to use technology, etc.
   • Creating outreach information that community groups can distribute to help individuals
     understand the program.
   • Providing clear, focused information for employer, including information that they can pro-
     vide to their employees.

The ABS management team invites members of the Equity and Inclusion Council to serve on
interview panels to help mitigate bias in hiring. The management team collaborates with the
Equity and Inclusion Office and will begin practices to improve services, strengthen community
engagement, identify prominent challenges for priority populations, and inform budget decisions.
The management team also provides skill development for managers to facilitate robust Equity
Circles.


Communications Office
The Communications Office provides both external and internal communication support to the
entire agency and is committed to promoting communication methods and strategies that are
understandable, usable, and meaningful to the workers and businesses we serve. Services include
media relations, strategic communications planning, crisis communication, consultation, graphic
design, social media oversight, web design and content management, editing for grammar and
readability, and more. Products include brochures, fact sheets, letters, newsletters, news releases,
reports, social media cards, web copy, and other creative communication vehicles. Members of the
Communications team each have portfolios within the agency, with assignments in each division as
well as shared services. Through these assignments, team members gain a better understanding
of the programs they support and the audiences they are trying to reach.




                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 8
The Communications Office works through a robust equity framework through the following
principles:
   • The Equity and Inclusion Office (EIO) members are embedded in the communications
     process to provide an equity review of all materials
   • Edit all content for readability and ease of translation or transcreation
   • Include the accessibility statement on all external messages
   • Coordinate between content creators, the Universal Access Coordinator, translators, and
     in-house resources who conduct quality assessments of translations
   • Design products to ADA accessibility standards with closed captioning, alternate text, high
     contrast, etc.
   • Partner with community groups to extend messaging to underserved communities

Within the Communications Office, members are working on developing their personal equity and
inclusion skills and awareness through:
   • Continuing monthly Equity Circles
   • Training in plain language
   • Training in accessibility for people with disabilities
   • Building an agency strategic communications plan that supports and aligns with our Equity
     Framework


Contributions and Recovery
The Contributions and Recovery Division supports the Unemployment Insurance Program and
Paid Leave Oregon. They support employer payroll reporting and payments, as well as debt
collection functions. Inclusivity is a part of the team’s core values, and all employees recognize
there is an opportunity to be better, individually and as a whole.

The division includes the Equity and Inclusion Office in leadership team meetings to foster a strong
partnership between those areas. All employees can interact with the division director in formal and
informal settings and with the Equity and Inclusion Office annually. The division is also proud to
share the Frances Online employer portal in Spanish with customers.
  




                 Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 9
Equity and Inclusion Office
The Equity and Inclusion Office (EIO) supports all agency divisions and offices in embedding equity
and inclusion practices into the creation and implementation of policies, procedures, and programs.
This supports our vision by helping reduce barriers to marginalized communities and makes sure
employees’ and customers’ identities do not impact their outcomes. Our 2023-2025 Agency
Request Budget Policy Option Package 112 for Organizational Support and Resiliency proposes
expanding the agency’s equity and inclusion staff from two to six full-time employees under this
new office. The EIO supports our programs carrying out diversity, equity, and inclusion work in a
variety of ways:
   • Collaborating with agency programs in developing, implementing, and monitoring the
     Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Plan
   • Helping division leadership carry out Equity and Inclusion Council recommendations
     approved by the Executive Team
   • Providing 1:1 coaching and consultation on topics like bystander intervention,
     microaggressions, and best practices for inclusion
   • Helping divisions that directly serve workers and businesses implement our Equity
     Framework for their programs and projects
   • Conducting equity reviews of new policies and practices to make sure we are not creating
     barriers for people trying to access our services
   • Conducting equity reviews of internal and external communications
   • Helping managers plan and facilitate Equity Circles
   • Providing staff support for diversity, equity, and inclusion-centered workgroups, such as
     the Equity and Inclusion Council and Empowerment Groups


Human Resources
The Office of Human Resources (OHR) provides human resource and labor consultation for all
employees on topics such as recruitment, staff development, personnel administration, benefits
administration, nondiscrimination and affirmative action, and cultural awareness and diversity.
The Office of Human Resources supports the Oregon Employment Department statewide Labor
Management Committee, advises the Equity and Inclusion Council, and communicates with the
Department of Administrative Services (DAS) Chief Human Resource Office (CHRO). OHR’s



               Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 10
Organization and Talent Development team gives classroom, online, and virtual learning
opportunities to employees.

The Office of Human Resources is committed to implementing goals and strategies outlined in the
Oregon Employment Department’s Affirmative Action Plan as well as collaborating with the agen-
cy’s newly-expanded Equity and Inclusion Office. Each team within OHR has helps embed an equi-
ty framework in work processes to respond to the diverse needs of our employees and Oregonians
across the state in recruitment, promotion, discipline, performance management, accommodations,
training, and policy development.

The OHR Recruitment team has made noticeable progress in adopting language and engaging in
equity and accessibility review processes to reduce barriers for priority populations. For example,
the recruitment team reviews supervisory management position descriptions to include language
that complies with Executive Order 22-11, which addresses affirmative action; equal employment
opportunity; and diversity, equity, and inclusion. The team also works with the Equity and Inclusion
Office to make sure all accommodation information is included in all job postings.

To increase management recruitments in underrepresented populations, recruitment analysts
work with division managers to develop an outreach strategy targeted to the specific position and
appropriate labor market. The recruitment analysts check the demographics of the applicant pool
mid-recruitment to make sure there is appropriate representation. If the representation does not
meet the appropriate labor market representation, recruiters may extend the job-opening, increase
advertising, or increase defined sourcing. The recruitment team maintains ongoing relationship with
Partners in Diversity and similar organizations to increase sourcing of underrepresented
communities. The team works closely with hiring managers and requires questions centered
on equity and inclusion at each stage of the recruitment. The required equity and inclusion
questions are developed in partnership with the Equity and Inclusion Council and entire
Executive Team.

OHR plays a pivotal role in growing the agency’s presence as a second chance employer and
recruiting more people who have been justice-involved. OHR has engaged in a collaborative
review process with the Director of Equity and Inclusion, the Equity and Inclusion Council, and the
Communications Office to receive input on documents and decisions related to the weighing test
and general background check language with the goal of reducing harm and barriers, increasing
comprehension, and practicing inclusivity.



                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 11
OHR continues to promote a workplace that values equity and inclusion through all practices.
OHR consults with the Director of Equity and Inclusion and Universal Access Coordinator to
address allegations of discrimination and racism, and educate staff on related issues. OHR works
with the Equity and Inclusion Council and Executive Team to use relevant organizational
demographic data and engage in conversations to explore data needs and requests. OHR has
collaborated with the Equity and Inclusion Office and Communications Office to build and update
their manager toolkit with equity and inclusion resources provided to all agency managers. The
Recruitment Planning section is currently undergoing an equity review that will assess the general
structure and create future opportunities for adjustments and improvements in recruitments.
This tool will be shared with the entire agency for consistency.

To continue cultivating an environment of diversity, equity, and inclusion education, OHR hosts
Equity Circles for staff to prompt self-reflection and remove barriers for populations that experience
marginalization. OHR is committed to strengthen efforts to support people with disabilities; adopt
inclusive language standards developed with the Equity and Inclusion Office, provide structured
mentorship opportunities for staff; and expand partnerships to develop a robust approach to
recruitment, development, and advancement at the department.


IT Services
Information Technology (IT) Services provides appropriate, sustainable, responsive, and adaptable
information technology services and solutions. IT supports the technology of our computer systems
in all parts of agency through acquisition, installation, maintenance, programming, mainframe and
database services, internet services and support, security, and software troubleshooting. The team
also manages several key vendor relationships to make sure we have the necessary tools to
support workers and businesses.

Vision: Be a trusted business partner, delivering flexible and scalable technology solutions that
empower OED to equitably serve Oregonians.

Mission: Provide secure and reliable technology solutions that enable accessible and efficient
employment services for all Oregonians.




                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 12
Guiding Principles:
   • Strategic collaboration
   • Deliver core services first
   • Configure over customize whenever possible
   • Focus on equitable access
   • Be engaged
   • Continuous improvement
   • Agency values focus
   • State of Oregon Enterprise Information Services (EIS) alignment
   • We value people

Information Technology Services aims to prioritize accessibility for all internal and external services.
This year, IT initiated a website accessibility project to evaluate the standards for services for our
customers with disabilities and implement an agency-wide auditing tool. This allows accurate
measurement of how accessible our systems are for people with disabilities. We will use this data
for quality assurance, auditing, compliance, and to work toward a seamless experience for people
with disabilities. IT connects with other organizations such as the Oregon Commission for the Blind
and Oregon Deaf and Hard of Hearing Services for feedback and insight to inform their services
and tool development.

IT works with the Equity and Inclusion Director and the Universal Access Coordinator to make
sure we are consistent with our language access protocol for phone conversations and recorded
messages. The Chief Information Officer supports and prioritizes agency equity initiatives and
currently serves as the executive sponsor for the Leaders of Color Empowerment Group. There
has been a significant effort to collaborate with the Equity and Inclusion Office to develop goals
and strategies to increase equitable deliverables and implement practices that reduce
technology barriers.




                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 13
Modernization
Our Modernization Program is a multi-year initiative focused on transforming the agency’s business
processes and core technology systems. The program aims to replace our computer systems
supporting Unemployment Insurance (UI) taxes, Paid Leave Oregon contributions, UI and Paid
Leave benefits, and delivery of employment services. The program helps business systems
transform and streamline with new technology. The program focuses on the agency’s business
processes, infrastructure, and applications. It includes service delivery updates, business
process re-engineering, and technical infrastructure solutions.

Modernization is committed to promoting, supporting, and expanding equity conversations in daily
engagements within the team and across the agency. Modernization used feedback from a variety
of groups to develop Frances Online. Frances Online is the new portal for payroll reporting and
benefit management. Modernization gathered input from a variety of groups to make sure
traditionally marginalized people do not experience barriers to use the system. As an example,
the employer portal is available in both English and Spanish. The claimant portal is in
development in both languages.

Modernization continues to use technology that increases accessibility to all agency programs.
They worked with independent consultants to conduct a usability and accessibility study in May
2022 for the employer-oriented components of Frances Online. The team will repeat this study
with the benefits-oriented components of Frances Online.

Modernization is using feedback from various populations and perspectives through in-person
workshops, community outreach, and town halls. They hosted almost a dozen in-person workshops
across the state to learn from rural and small communities. The program works with the
Unemployment Insurance and Paid Leave Oregon Divisions on community outreach.

The leadership team is building equity and inclusion into the team’s practices through the racial
equity capacity-building training. Leadership encourages staff to apply skills learned internally and
externally. The Interim Deputy Director for Modernization is also the executive sponsor for the
People with Disabilities Empowerment Group. All Modernization staff are encouraged to attend
additional equity and inclusion trainings and to participate in Empowerment Groups.




                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 14
Paid Leave Oregon
Paid Leave Oregon provides eligible people with paid time off from work to care for and bond
with a child during the first year of the child’s birth or arrival through adoption or foster care. This
essential program allows people to care for family members with serious health conditions or for
safety reasons including domestic violence, stalking, sexual assault, and harassment (safe leave).

Paid Leave Oregon recognizes that this program can inherently help reduce barriers to stable
employment for many historically marginalized communities, including people with disabilities, older
workers, women, working parents, people of color, trans people, and other historically marginalized
groups. The team is committed to providing support, time, and easy access to paid leave benefits
regardless of race, ethnicity, gender, disability, language, or technology proficiency. As part of its
commitment, Paid Leave Oregon hired the agency’s first division-specific equity policy analyst
and started an internal Equity and Accessibility Alliance. This is a committee made of employees
focused on equity, inclusion, and belonging, supporting the Paid Leave vision and values in all
aspects of the program. This committee leads specific projects and provides resources, coaching,
and mentoring to the entire team. The entire division also participates in the racial equity
capacity-building training series.

Paid Leave Oregon has helped the public and communities historically underserved and under-
resourced to understand the program. During 2022, Paid Leave conducted community engagement
using the Governor’s Racial Justice Council’s guidance to identify equity-focused priorities for the
division’s budget. As a result, the team has focused on creating materials in multiple language and
conducted extensive community outreach. For example, the program designed a transcreated
website in Oregon’s six most commonly-used languages and worked with a vendor to make sure
messaging is clear and easy for all our customers to understand.

Paid Leave Oregon’s outreach team has reached over 22,000 employers and workers in Oregon
since June of 2022 through virtual and in-person presentations, door-to-door outreach, and tabling
events. The Paid Leave Outreach team continues to work with businesses, labor unions, and other
constituents investing in relationships with particular attention to disability, income, race, ethnicity,
culture, gender, gender identity, employment status, education level, geographic location, access
to technology, and justice -system involvement. The team’s engagement strategy involves warm
handoffs with trusted partners, followed by virtual or in-person meetings, presentations, town- halls,
and community gatherings.




                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 15
The outreach team had tables at outreach fairs, cultural celebrations, back-to-school events,
awareness month events, and conferences with formats in multiple languages. The team uses
small, non-competitive agreements with community-based organizations to connect with historically
underrepresented groups. Agreements include food, childcare, interpreters, and staff time
considerations to overcome some barriers to participation.

Paid Leave Oregon continues to hire a diverse workforce that represent communities throughout
Oregon. The team has increased its bilingual and intercultural staff as well as diversifying the
geographic representation of staff. The program has intentional, ongoing evaluation of current
recruitment and hiring processes to make recruitment and interviewing easier to navigate for all
candidates.

All internal and external documents go through extensive review for plain language, gender-neutral
language, internal or institutional jargon, ableist language, and non-violent language. All position
descriptions and interview questions go through an equity review, which includes a review by the
translations team and the Equity and Accessibility Alliance. Paid Leave has led the way in writing
racial equity impact statements before Oregon’s law requiring these went into effect. Paid Leave
Oregon continues to evaluate and improve the racial-equity, impact statement and is building an
equity-focused data team to gather, analyze, interpret, and report data to inform leadership on
disparate impacts.


Unemployment Insurance
The Unemployment Insurance (UI) Division administers unemployment insurance benefits that
provide temporary, partial wage replacement for workers who are unemployed through no fault of
their own. This income provides support for displaced workers and their communities by helping to
mitigate economic downturns.

The division is committed to continuing to look for ways to support workplace inclusion and the
people we serve by training on unconscious bias, bystander intervention skill building, and other
related topics. The division is working to embed accountability for promoting goals of diversity, eq-
uity, and inclusion into all UI leadership performance accountability and feedback plans. They are
geographically diverse, with members living and working in 16 of Oregon’s 36 counties. The majori-
ty of the division works remotely, which allows them to better represent the people of Oregon.




                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 16
The Unemployment Insurance Division provides information to Oregonians in multiple languages
and formats. The program’s website unemployment.oregon.gov has been professionally translated
into multiple languages and will continue to be accessible in Amharic, Arabic, Chinese (Simplified),
Chinese (Traditional), English, Farsi, Korean, Lao, Russian, Somali, Spanish, and Vietnamese.

The division is working diligently to modernize technology and processes, building on the lessons
learned during the pandemic. This includes using an equity-focused and customer centric approach
to allow self-service options for customers to easily access at any time, day or night. They continue
to use our Equity Framework when implementing new projects, programs, or other programmatic
changes.

They created an Equitable Access to Unemployment Insurance (EAUI) team to build relationships
with Oregon’s historically underserved communities, better understand access barriers faced by
these communities, and promote equitable access to UI services. This builds on UI’s equity
projects throughout the past biennium, such as contracting with community-based organizations to
conduct outreach and application assistance with underserved communities and make our
website’s chatbot and live chat available in Spanish. The team has purchased a Braille printer that
can be used by any of our programs for creating more accessible outreach materials or responding
to requests for Braille communications.

The EAUI team is focusing on outreach to Native American, Black, African, African American,
Latino/a/x/e, Hispanic, Asian, Pacific Islander, immigrant, refugee, asylum-seeker, linguistically
diverse, economically disadvantaged, people with disabilities, LGBTQIA2S+, youth, and farm and
agriculture communities. The team is using the State of Oregon Diversity, Equity and Inclusion
Action Plan, available unemployment insurance demographic data on potentially underserved
populations, and recommendations from the agency’s Equity and Inclusion Council and Equity
and Inclusion Office to determine the focus of its customer outreach efforts.

The team will also compile qualitative and quantitative data in order to better identify, understand,
and resolve access barriers. Agency economists will conduct a historical analysis of unemployment
insurance participation rates in underserved communities, identify program participation rates, and
measure the effects of future outreach efforts. The agency will use the initial data analysis to
establish a foundation for periodic analysis of participation rates in underserved communities.
The team will also use the analysis to identify strategies for removing or mitigating barriers
through policy and practice and measuring the outcomes of those strategies.



                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 17
The UI Division requested and received a UI Navigator grant from the U.S. Department of Labor
to increase equitable access. This allows staff to work with community-based organizations to
increase awareness of the program. The Unemployment Insurance Division is also participating
in a Tiger Team initiative with the U.S. Department of Labor to identify additional opportunities to
increase equitable access. Through this initiative, they are requesting federal grants for several
future accessibility-centered projects.


Workforce and Economic Research
The Workforce and Economic Research Division collects, estimates, analyzes, publishes, and
distributes employment-related economic information to a variety of customers to help them make
decisions. Oregon’s tribal governments are among our primary customers, as well as private
businesses, people who are unemployed or otherwise seeking jobs, state and local workforce
boards, elected officials and other policymakers, education and training entities, students,
government agencies, and news media. Information from the agency helps customers understand
current and future workforce trends and economic conditions. The division regularly posts
economic and workforce information on QualityInfo.org.

The Workforce and Economic Research Division embraces values and practices that prioritize
equity and inclusion, and remain proactive in improving internal processes as well as external
services by promoting a culture of learning. A large and impactful initiative is to create an internal
committee for developing a diversity, equity, and inclusion action plan with implementation
strategies.

The division has a diversity, equity, and inclusion committee to lead, develop, and support the
division’s strategies that promote diversity, equity, and inclusion. The committee encourages
thoughtful research through an equity and inclusion framework that benefits all members of
Oregon’s diverse labor force and strives to produce labor market research that is accessible to
all communities. The committee helps the Workforce and Economic Research Division become
a workplace where individual strengths are recognized and appreciated, and all employees are
encouraged to contribute. The scope of the committee includes research projects, training,
consulting, outreach to customers, and other initiatives that support or encourage equity and
inclusion. For example, in 2023 the committee drafted their first division-specific action plan that
includes recommendations and tasks reviewed by the division’s management team and the
Equity and Inclusion Office.




                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 18
The division redacts identifiable job applicant information to reduce as much bias as possible in
recruitments. To support retention, the committee engages new and existing staff with relevant
statewide and regional data surrounding diversity, equity, and inclusion information (i.e wage data
varied by race). They do this through sharing resources and introducing diversity, equity, and
inclusion material in committee meetings.

The Regional Analysis team engages with communities and organizations across the state to
increase access to Labor Market Information and promote awareness of research data and
services to external customers, especially those who service underrepresented groups. Part of
these efforts include exploring communities’ language access needs and applying principles of
plain language. The team interacts with customers to drive the need to improve data collection
techniques and overall data practices and delivery. The team has strengthened its outreach efforts
to customers from educational entities and industry associations to promote awareness of
Workforce and Economic Research positions at the Oregon Employment Department to
underrepresented communities and continue mitigating access barriers to data.

The team’s employees and managers continue to stay connected with diversity, equity, and
inclusion efforts across the agency and maintain strong partnerships with the Equity and Inclusion
Office and Council. Some employees participate in the Spanish Language Learning and Practicing
Empowerment Group, and the division director is the executive sponsor of the Parents, Guardians,
and Caregivers Empowerment Group.


Workforce Operations
The Workforce Operations Division helps Oregon grow a robust economy by customizing local
workforce services that help the community and solve challenges of the workforce with recruitment,
hiring, retention, promotion, and training. The division assists businesses in securing federal tax
credits and offset training costs for hiring people receiving public assistance, people with
disabilities, veterans, and those who have been unemployed longer than six months.

Through a collaborative, customer-centric service delivery model, the division works with partner
agencies and organizations to assess and improve the job-readiness of candidates, including
teaching them job-search skills and coaching them on job-search strategies, options, and
expectations. The division collaborates with WorkSource partners who receive Future Ready
funding. Primary partners include regional and local training providers (Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act Title I), Workforce and Talent Development Board, Local Workforce Development


                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 19
Boards, Office of Workforce Investments (an interagency partnership between the Higher
Education Coordinating Commission and the Oregon Employment Department), Department of
Human Services’ Self-Sufficiency and Vocational Rehabilitation programs, Commission for the
Blind, Oregon’s 17 independent community colleges, and local economic development
organizations.
  
Workforce Operations promotes equity and inclusion in internal and customer-facing interactions
with tailored outreach to priority populations in all regions of Oregon. The priority is to transform
outreach into engagement. Workforce Operations staff regularly engage with Oregonians facing
crises and have received training around Trauma Informed Care and transformational coaching
methods. Workforce Operations acknowledges that its customers also face many additional
barriers to service and re-employment such as racism, ageism, bias towards gender identity, and
other biases related to protected classes. This concern is at the forefront of the division’s service
delivery, and they have worked with the SNAP Training and Development program to include
payment for gender-affirming documentation for individuals who participate in the program and are
in need. The division continues to consider ways to support inclusivity within its own workforce and
will provide additional training related to bystander intervention and the identification and history of
structural racism as part of this action plan.

The Workforce Operations Division engages job seekers across the state at over 35 WorkSource
Oregon centers, connecting them with potential employers, including agency positions.
WorkSource Oregon centers accept walk-ins and provide an online scheduling tool for in-person
and virtual appointments to increase accessibility for Oregonians who are not able to travel or
otherwise face barriers to attending in-person appointments.

Some of the division’s priority populations include Black, Indigenous, and other communities of
color; veterans, including disabled veterans; people who have been justice-involved; migrant
seasonal farmworkers; people with disabilities; tribal employers and workers; and rural
Oregonians. To assist with meaningful access, its website worksourceoregon.org has been
professionally translated into 11 languages, following the agency’s Language Access Procedure
and Equity Framework. WorkSource Oregon centers also employ a high number of bilingual
employees and are trained in working with customers with disabilities to make sure we are giving
them equitable access to our services.

The Workforce Operations Division will expand current equity-centered development opportunities
by providing all staff professional development time each month and creating structured mentorship
opportunities.

                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 20
Diversity, equity, and inclusion goals
The Oregon Employment Department is committed to building diversity, equity, and inclusion goals
that are meaningful, actionable, and measurable. Our goals align with both the agency’s strategic
plan for 2019-2025 and its Affirmative Action Plan for 2023-2025. The seven focus areas of the
plan are Community Engagement; Communications; Data; Decision-making and Budgets;
Contracting and Procurement; Diversifying Workforce and Internal Culture; and Service Delivery.

Each of the seven focus areas below includes the challenges; actions; division or team responsible
for the actions; and initial milestones and next steps. Actions from our 2023-2025 Affirmative Action
Plan are included for full transparency and alignment and are denoted with an asterisk (*).


Community Engagement
Challenge 1: Communities lack opportunities to easily engage with our programs.

Action 1.1:
Use lessons learned from Paid Leave Oregon and UI rulemaking practices to explore ways to
make agency wide rulemaking more accessible.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Executive Team
Initial milestones and next steps:
Explore and adopt accessibility options by June 2025.

Action 1.2:
Contract with community-based organizations through the UI navigator grant to increase
engagement, with a focus on English language learners; immigrants and refugees; Black,
indigenous, and people of color (BIPOC) communities; LGBTQIA2S+; people with disabilities;
rural communities; young adults; and low-income households.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance
Initial milestones and next steps:
Request for Grant Proposal published by July 2023. Grantees will be expected to distribute at least
250 paper materials per month, reach at least 15 potential claimants each week, host at least two
UI educational trainings per month, and attend at least one event per month to provide UI
information by June 30, 2025.



                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 21
Action 1.3:
Continue to offer listening sessions to specific audiences or communities when the agency plans
to change UI rules, with a goal of at least two listening sessions hosted for each rule change and
documenting feedback. The listening sessions will have Spanish and American Sign Language
interpreters and possibly others as applicable.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; documentation of feedback received and how feedback is considered is already in place.
Create a standard operating procedure for rule making that included how information about the
listening sessions will be publicized to reach impacted audiences, how feedback will be
documented, and timelines for the engagement activities by August 2023.

Action 1.4:
Continue to ask Advisory Council for feedback on all new UI rules and document feedback.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting feedback received and how feedback is considered by July 2023.

Action 1.5:
Continue building relationships and documenting engagement between UI and communities across
Oregon, with a focus on Native American, Black, African, African American, Latino/a/x, Hispanic,
Asian, Pacific Islander, immigrant, refugee, asylum-seeker, linguistically diverse, economically
disadvantaged, people with disabilities, LGBTQIA2S+, and farm and agricultural communities.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting engagement, including feedback received and how it is considered
by July 2023.

Action 1.6:
Create and pilot a community engagement plan within the SNAP Employment and Training and
Able Bodied Working Adult program in Workforce Operations and in collaboration with ODHS and
other community partners.



               Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 22
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations
Initial milestones and next steps:
Pilot plan by April 2024. Document outcomes, including feedback received and how feedback
is considered. Make recommendation to either expand this engagement pilot to more areas or
change engagement strategies.

Action 1.7:
Begin gathering data though a survey or other tool to inform community engagement for Workforce
Operations.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin gathering data by June 2023. Compile recommendations and apply recommendations to
engagement pilot.


Communications
Challenge 2: Communities aren’t aware of programs and services available to them.

Action 2.1:
Create media campaigns, marketing, “Did you know?” informational videos, and other avenues to
share Contributions and Recovery information with underserved communities and in plain
language.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Contributions and Recovery
Initial milestones and next steps:
Convene workgroup by June 2024 to discuss most misunderstood contributions topics identified
from phone call and other customer service forums. Workgroup sessions will include developing
measures of success and requesting community feedback. Create plan for requesting community
feedback and measures of success by December 2024.

Action 2.2:
Conduct focus groups to get feedback on new Frances Online system with at least three
underserved groups




               Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 23
Division or team responsible for the action:
Modernization
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin focus groups by June 2023. Document feedback received and how it is considered. Create
survey for participants by June 2023.

Action 2.3:
Create and document partnerships between the EAUI team and other state agencies working in
underserved communities to increase underserved communities’ knowledge of the UI system.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; documentation process created by July 2023. Create informal partnerships that support
at least six underserved communities by December 2023.

Action 2.4:
Contract with marketing consultants to help select and track the best social media campaigns,
marketing, “Did you know?” informational videos, and other avenues to share UI information with
underserved communities and in plain language.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance
Initial milestones and next steps:
Contract documentation prepared by July 2023. Develop measures of success and a process for
requesting community feedback by December 2023.

Challenge 3: Not enough certified bilingual employees to conduct quality reviews of
translated materials.

Action 3.1:
Contract with community-based bilingual vendors to increase options and turnaround times for
conducting quality reviews of translated materials.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Have contract in place by April 2024 to add to our options and turnaround times for conducting
quality reviews.


               Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 24
Action 3.2:
Ensure that language access policy is enforced and practiced during recruitment planning for
public-facing divisions. This will include incorporating translation quality review needs into
recruitment processes for deciding whether a recruitment should be bilingual, and whether it
should be bilingual required or preferred.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources
Initial milestones and next steps:
Incorporate process by June 2024 and document changes in hiring of bilingual employees.

Challenge 4: Without intentional review processes or resources, agency communications
could be difficult to understand or include unintentionally disrespectful or harmful
language.

Action 4.1:
Implement an intentional review process for communications that includes edits for plain language,
terms that are easy to translate across multiple languages, gender-inclusive terms, non-violent
language, and reducing jargon.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Communications
Initial milestones and next steps:
Implement process across all divisions by July 2023. Track number of documents that
Communications edits.

Action 4.2:
Host regular meeting of communications, equity, and program staff to discuss challenges and
successes from the communications review process for agency divisions
 Division or team responsible for the action:
Communications
Initial milestones and next steps:
Host first meeting by August 2023 and at least four meetings per year.

Action 4.3:
Develop an inclusive, person-centered language guide and update it annually. Share examples
regularly with all staff through multiple formats (newsletters, Equity Circles, team meetings, etc.) so
that everyone has a common knowledge and understanding of inclusive language.


                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 25
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Create first guide by September 2023; send first communication to all staff by October 2023.
Request employee feedback and document how feedback is considered.

Action 4.4:
Develop a glossary of common Paid Leave Oregon terms to assist with document creation from
an accessibility and person-centered perspective.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon
Initial milestones and next steps:
Create first glossary by September 2023. Request and gather employee feedback by April 2024.
Document how feedback is considered on a quarterly basis.


Data
Challenge 5: There are insufficient data on the communities we serve.

Action 5.1:
Include options to provide demographics information on sexual orientation and gender identity for
agency customers in modernized systems. Train employees on these new questions.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Finalize questions by April 2023; create trainings by August 2023. Monitor response rates,
customer feedback, and employee feedback on a quarterly basis through June 2025. Document
how feedback is considered.

Action 5.2:
Develop a Data Equity Framework to determine success and key performance benchmarks for
Paid Leave Oregon customer data, including reaching priority populations and evaluating priority
population outcomes.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon




               Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 26
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin drafting action plan by October 2023; complete draft and implement by April 2024. Monitor
key performance indicators on an ongoing basis and conduct quarterly reviews to develop
recommendations for responding to trends in customer data.

Action 5.3:
Gather data from survey engagements to identify gaps and trends in Paid Leave Oregon
engagement efforts.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; track community survey feedback.
Review each quarter and document how feedback is considered starting September 2023.

Action 5.4:
Collaborate with the agency’s Workforce and Economic Research Division to identify new methods
for gathering demographic data to understand and resolve barriers to the UI system to increase
participation within underserved populations.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin collaboration by July 2023 and develop a plan of action based on the recommendations by
December 2023.

Action 5.5:
Collect customer demographic data during the initial stages of the Workforce Operations
modernization project to inform program goals
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations
Initial milestones and next steps:
Collect data from May to August 2023. Review key findings and document equity-based
recommendation for modernization project by December 2023.




               Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 27
Challenge 6: Decision makers need more data on internal workforce demographics, includ-
ing any trends or disparities in hiring, retention, etc.

Action 6.1:
Create partnership between Human Resources and Equity and Inclusion Office to compile a
comprehensive report consisting of multiple aggregated data points (i.e. organizational diversity,
retention and advancement rates, language requests, overall climate, etc.) to share quarterly and
annually agency wide.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin by December 2023. Document any trends and identify any actions in response to trends.

Action 6.2:
Implement metrics to track the Workforce and Economic Research retention rates by demograph-
ics to help identify areas of support
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce and Economic Research
Initial milestones and next steps:
Implement metrics by December 2023. Document any trends and identify any actions in response
to trends.


Decision-making and budgets
Challenge 7: Resource allocation decisions, including discretionary budget allocation,
aren’t informed using an equity framework.

Action 7.1:
Collaborate with the Equity and Inclusion Office and lessons learned from Paid Leave Oregon to
develop mechanisms for tracking and using community feedback on our budget.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Administrative and Business Services
Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop mechanisms by June 2024 Use engagement mechanisms for developing
2025-2027 budget.




                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 28
Action 7.2:
Learn from other divisions about how they have invested in priority populations and identify areas
for improvement within Workforce Operations for greater budget equity and complete a root-cause
analysis for barriers faced.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin bi-monthly meetings in August 2023 with other divisions. Begin gathering data related to
barriers faced in Workforce Operations by December 2023. Complete a root cause analysis to
identify existing barriers by June 2024. Use the findings and conversations with other divisions to
improve Workforce Operations budget equity.

Contracting and procurement
Challenge 8: Minority-owned businesses and vendors are underrepresented in
agency contracts.

Action 8.1:
Continue to streamline processes, participate in state outreach and engagement events, and
promote opportunities with the Department of Administrative Services to support and mitigate
challenges for vendors, with an emphasis on minority owned vendors and small and intermediate
contracts.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Administrative and Business Services
Initial milestones and next steps:
Increase percentage of contracts with COBID vendors from 5% to 10% of total contracts by
June 2025.

Action 8.2:
Establish a tribal consultation process and identify language access needs for contracting and
procurement services by July 2024.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Administrative and Business Services
Initial milestones and next steps:
Identify mechanism to update language services and establish consultation process by July 2024.




                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 29
Action 8.3:
Increase transparency in procurement processes by developing infrastructure for additional data
collection mechanisms, exploring existing data sources, and identifying potential barriers to
mitigate with new changes.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Administrative and Business Services
Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop infrastructure by June 2025.

Action 8.4:
Develop small, non-competitive agreements with community-based organizations to connect Paid
Leave Oregon to historically underrepresented groups. Agreements will include food, childcare,
interpreters, and staff time considerations.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting the number of agreements by July 2023. Track community survey
feedback. Review each quarter and document how feedback is considered starting
September 2023.


Diversifying workforce and internal culture
Challenge 9: Not all internal trainings are accessible or have been reviewed for
cultural awareness.

Action 9.1:
Review agency trainings and create plan for cultural awareness, including more accessibility
options, such as voiceover, captions, recording live trainings, etc.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin review by December 2023. Create first draft of plan by June 2024 and request feedback
from all agency trainers. Finalize plan by September 2024. Assist trainers in implementing plan
and monitor employee feedback from trainings. Document how feedback is considered.




               Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 30
Challenge 10: Government recruitment processes can be difficult for external applicants
to understand and access.

Action 10.1:
Collaborate with Office of Human Resources to develop equity reviews process for job listing
design and recruitment and hiring practices for each division.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin collaboration and develop process with all divisions by June 2024. Track recruitment data
and respond to any new trends.

Action 10.2:
Develop comprehensive recruitment and interview guidance, including writing interview questions
and position descriptions for increasing plain language and avoiding gender coding, ableism,
violent language, etc.; preparing an interview panel, equity reviews, and evaluating candidates
through the Paid Leave Oregon rubric.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon
Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop guidance and training by September 2023.
Track progress through employee demographic data and engagement surveys. Review quarterly
and give recommendations based on outcomes (for example, in comparing the division labor force
to the and statewide labor force.

Action 10.3:
Leverage Business Services team to promote agency recruitments to underrepresented commu-
nities via job boards, community-specific spaces, and other gathering spaces by inputting these
positions in iMatchSkills.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations
Initial milestones and next steps:
Business Services team will begin promoting select agency recruitments by January 2024. Explore
using Workday to track where applicants discovered the job. Track recruitment data for 6 months
and review for new trends in hiring and applications.



               Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 31
Action 10.4:
Post Migrant Seasonal Farmworker Representative recruitments for us in both English and Spanish
and translate interview questions in both English and Spanish
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin new process by February 2024. Track recruitment data for 6 months and review for new
trends in hiring and applications.

Challenge 11: We must continue to foster fairness, equity, and inclusion to maintain a work-
place environment where everyone is treated with respect and dignity.

Action 11.1:
Conduct quarterly Equity Circles within Contributions and Recovery, beginning with division leader-
ship and then moving to frontline employees.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Contributions and Recovery
Initial milestones and next steps:
Conduct one leadership session each quarter, beginning Q2 2023. Collaborate with Equity and
Inclusion Office to establish facilitation technique for leadership team. Conduct at least one Equity
Circle with each team by December 2023.

Action 11.2:
Invite at least one representative from our equity-centered groups or committees to each Contribu-
tions and Recovery interview panel for open competitive recruitments.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Contributions and Recovery
Initial milestones and next steps:
Representation from our equity-centered groups or committees will begin by July 2023.

*Action 11.3:
Train all current employees and regularly train new employees in the Culture Matters Part 1: Man-
aging Unconscious Bias and Culture Matters Part 2: Bystander Intervention Skill Building offerings.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office



                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 32
Initial milestones and next steps:
Start trainings by June 2023 and train all current employees by June 2024. Train new employees
within 6 months of hire. Survey participants and document how feedback is considered.

*Action 11.4:
Conduct quarterly drop-in sessions open to all staff to practice bystander intervention techniques.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Host first drop-in session by August 2023. Survey participants and document how feedback is
considered.

*Action 11.5:
Assist managers in facilitating Equity Circles (or future projects related to discussions of equity and
inclusion) upon request/as needed and offer practice sessions.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Offer first practice sessions by July 2023. Survey participants and document how feedback is con-
sidered.

*Action 11.6:
Continue facilitating Empowerment Groups (affinity groups) and create more.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Four groups are currently in place; create at least two more groups by December 2023.

*Action 11.7:
Continue providing a wide range of learning opportunities open to all employees on topics such as
trauma and trauma-informed practices, anti-racism, micro-aggressions, racial equity, mental health,
Veterans, restorative justice, history of race in Oregon, gender, and gender identity. Topics will also
include older and younger workers; parents, guardians, and caregivers in the workplace;
neurodivergence; and autism. The goal is to host at least 15 events.




                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 33
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Host at least 15 events by June 2025. Survey participants and document how feedback is
considered.

*Action 11.8:
Develop an agency wide equity framework as a tool for proactively preventing or reducing
unintended disparate impacts of policies, practices, and projects that affect our workforce.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop framework by June 2024. Work closely with each division to assist in implementation,
document feedback and lessons learned, and update framework as needed.

*Action 11.9:
Request employee input regarding building a culture of equity and inclusion to determine what
strategies are working well and what strategies need to be changed or developed.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting input and how input is considered by August 2023.

*Action 11.10:
Develop and execute a strategic communications plan to promote the agency’s equity work
throughout the agency, including videos, newsletters, and other tactics to actively engage existing
employees and communicate the agency’s equity work to potential applicants. This plan will be
informed by employee input.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Complete plan by February 2024. Monitor implementation, including employee input and document
how input is considered.




               Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 34
*Action 11.11:
Develop or obtain anti-bias training for all hiring managers and interview panelists.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Announce training by June 2024. Survey participants and document how feedback is considered.

Action 11.12:
Develop or obtain racial equity training for all employees
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Announce training by July 2024. Train all new employees within 90 days of hire and train all
employees by June 2025.

Action 11.13:
Participate as a leadership team on racial equity, disability inclusion, and trauma-informed
trainings. These trainings would be in addition to the agency’s other required trainings for
leadership teams and other employees.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Executive Team
Initial milestones and next steps:
Complete trainings by June 2024.

*Action 11.14:
Allocate a minimum number of hours for employees and managers to attend diversity, equity, and
inclusion training, events, and Empowerment Groups. Allocate a required minimum number of
hours for all managers to participate in training on topics such as unconscious biases, anti-racism,
restorative justice, and facilitation skills.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Executive Team
Initial milestones and next steps:
Decide minimum number of hours by November 2023. Monitor implementation and employee
feedback. Document how feedback is considered.




                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 35
*Action 11.15:
Embed accountability for promoting equity and inclusion into all supervisory managers’
performance accountability and feedback (PAF) plans. This will include templates and examples
of what is expected of managers.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Executive Team
Initial milestones and next steps:
Complete templates and communicate to all managers by December 2023. Monitor implementation
and compliance.

*Action 11.16:
Improve the use of inclusive language (plain language, gender-inclusive, transparent) in the
agency’s job postings and ensure the agency’s goal for equity and inclusion is clear and direct.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing;
Adopt agency language resources to update job posting template and recruitment documents
by April 2024.

*Action 11.17:
Review and update applicant screening and interview processes to focus scoring on the skills
and qualities candidates bring, including how they are informed by both lived and professional
experience.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources
Initial milestones and next steps:
Establish required training and/or guiding documents for process by June 2024.

Action 11.18:
Share aggregate data with Equity and Inclusion Office quarterly and annually on workforce discrim-
ination complaints received related to disability, race, gender, justice involvement, etc.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources
Initial milestones and next steps:
Implement data sharing structure and cadence by December 2023.


                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 36
Action 11.19:
Adopt and implement Department of Administrative Services mentoring toolkit to increase formal
mentorships and professional development pathways, with specific opportunities for employees
of color.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources
Initial milestones and next steps:
Implement toolkit framework across agency by December 2024.

Action 11.20:
Collaborate with division managers and Workforce Operations Business Services team to curate
and expand outreach and recruitment processes. Document process in our manager toolkit for
agency wide consistency and applicability.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources
Initial milestones and next steps:
Establish process by June 2025.

Action 11.21:
Strengthen and develop new partnerships with DEI-focused organizations and educational
institutions to support job pathways, provide interview and training resources, and help mitigate
related employment challenges identified by priority populations. HR Recruitment team will consult
with other state agencies for implementation support.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting by July 2023.
Create system to track partnerships and establish formal collaborations with 10 DEI –focused
organizations by June 2024.

Action 11.22:
Collaborate with EIO to review current discrimination, harassment, etc. reporting processes, identi-
fy areas of improvement, and explore a confidential advocate protocol.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources



                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 37
Initial milestones and next steps:
Collaborate with state partners (DAS Chief Human Resources Office, Oregon Department of Jus-
tice, etc.) to explore confidential advocate protocol by June 2025.

Action 11.23:
Review, update, and enforce agency wide exit interview process and identify mechanism to use
feedback collected through exit interviews.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources
Initial milestones and next steps:
Complete all actions by December 2023.

Action 11.24:
Review Performance Accountability and Feedback process and identify areas of improvement.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources/Chief Human Resources Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Complete initial review, identify opportunities for improvement, and make recommendations to DAS
Chief Human Resources Office by June 2025.

Action 11.25:
Collaborate with Equity and Inclusion Office for foundational equity and language training
opportunities within IT.
Division or team responsible for the action:
IT
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting by July 2023. Establish training cadence for at least four trainings per
year for IT managers and staff and begin attending by June 2024.

Action 11.26:
Create an equity and inclusion committee within Modernization, to include vendors.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Modernization
Initial milestones and next steps:
Create committee by July 2023.



               Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 38
Action 11.27:
Continue the work of the Paid Leave Equity and Accessibility Alliance, an employee committee
that serves on interview panels, provides mentoring and coaching, and conducts stay and exit
interviews.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; track committee projects by February 2023.
Determine success measures for projects and continue to track each one, report out each quarter
during division meetings

Action 11.28:
Work with Organizational Change Management to develop internal Paid Leave Oregon conflict
resolution path with restorative justice, non-violent communication, and trauma-informed
approaches for interpersonal conflicts that do not rise to the level of policy violations.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon
Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop plan by December 2023. Implement across division with training by April 2024. Track
number of reported conflicts to managers or leads starting June 2024.

Action 11.29:
Develop internal Paid Leave Oregon escalation plan that centers Black and brown employees
when interacting with the public or when conflict arises with a manager.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon
Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop plan by September 2023. Implement by December 2023.
Track number of reported conflicts to managers or leads starting January 2024

Action 11.30:
Develop stay and exit interviews within Paid Leave Oregon.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon
Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop interviews by January 2024. Track progress through employee engagement surveys.
Review quarterly and give recommendations based on survey results.

               Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 39
Action 11.31:
Develop Paid Leave Oregon expectations focused on a person-centered approach and
psychological safety.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon
Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop expectations by June 2023.
Implement by September 2023. Track success through ongoing quarterly employee engagement
surveys and give recommendations based on results.

Action 11.32:
Continue employee discussions within Paid Leave Oregon centering the most impacted to help
inform and guide policies and procedures that affect employees.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting by July 2023. Track success through ongoing quarterly employee
engagement surveys and give recommendations based on results.

Action 11.33:
Develop and strengthen partnerships between Research Regional Analysis team and both
educational institutions and industry associations to increase awareness of open positions and
support job pathways for communities of color and other priority populations into the research field.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce and Economic Research
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting by July 2023, including any feedback received on recruitment strate-
gies and how feedback is considered.

Action 11.34:
Include regular DEI updates at Workforce Operations meetings and events and create a plan for
relationship building between Equity and Inclusion Office and Workforce Operations.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations




                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 40
Initial milestones and next steps:
Create a plan that describes the nature of the updates, duration, frequency, and partnership
between both offices by June 2023. Request employee feedback at least twice a year and
document how feedback is considered.

Action 11.35:
Provide at least two hours per month of equity-related professional development time to all
Workforce Operations employees.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations
Initial milestones and next steps:
Create guidance around use of the hours by November 2023. Provide allotment to staff by
December 2023.

Action 11.36:
Train and support Workforce Operations managers on anti-racist and trauma-informed practices.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations
Initial milestones and next steps:
Train managers by June 2024. Survey participants to measure impacts.

Action 11.37:
Develop parameters for an open door policy within Workforce Operations to support employees.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations
Initial milestones and next steps:
Develop parameters by April 2024. Request employee feedback and document how feedback is
considered at least twice a year.

Action 11.38:
Offer members of Workforce Operations leadership team as mentors for employees in
Empowerment Groups.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations
Initial milestones and next steps:
Contact Empowerment Groups by May 2024. Equity and Inclusion Office will ask Empowerments
Group for feedback on the process and career progression.

                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 41
Action 11.39:
Collaborate with the Equity and Inclusion Office to continue implementing Equity Circles within
Workforce Operations, including providing supplementary trainings on difficult conversations,
cultural intelligence, and expanded bystander intervention trainings, and meet quarterly to discuss
impacts, outcomes, and next steps.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin collaboration by June 2023. Review employee feedback at least quarterly and document
how feedback is considered. Survey participants from supplemental trainings to evaluate impacts
and respond to needs.

Action 11.40:
Include training on statewide and regional data related to diversity, equity, and inclusion topics in
the article planning protocols within Workforce and Economic Research.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce and Economic Research
Initial milestones and next steps:
Implement across all planning protocols by December 2023.

Challenge 12: Per Workday demographics, people with disabilities are underrepresented in
our workforce.

*Action 12.1:
Incorporate messaging about disability in our equity and inclusion strategic internal
communications plan to inform employees of the definition of disability and how Workday’s
demographic information is and is not used, with the goal of more employees providing their
disability information in Workday and enabling better tracking of any trends related to disability.
This plan will also include developing internal resources regarding disability and employment
for all employees and managers.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Complete plan by February 2024. Monitor employee demographics for changes in voluntary
disability disclosure.



                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 42
*Action 12.2:
Provide at least six all-staff learning opportunities and six all- staff communications related to
disability inclusion per biennium. The learning opportunities will include virtual or recorded options
that staff can consume at various times and locations.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Provide learning opportunities by June 2025. Survey participants and document how feedback is
considered.

*Action 12.3:
Create one or more Empowerment Groups focused on disabilities. All Empowerment Groups fo-
cused on disabilities will have active executive-level sponsorship and participation. The groups will
provide connection to mentors and a safe space to raise concerns, questions, and ideas related to
disability inclusion.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
First group was created in February 2023. Monitor implementation and participant feedback.

*Action 12.4:
Solicit regular input and feedback from all staff regarding disability inclusion, which may include
all-staff surveys and targeted focus groups.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin soliciting input by June 2023 and release all-staff survey by October 2023. Document feed-
back received and how feedback is considered.

*Action 12.5:
Collaborate with community members and partners to strategize ways to increase employment for
people with visible and invisible or hidden disabilities.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin collaboration by June 2024. Document community recommendations and how
recommendations are considered.

                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 43
*Action 12.6:
Create a National Disability Employment Awareness Month campaign, which may include guest
speakers or public-facing materials.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Complete campaign by November 2023. Document employee feedback and how it is considered.

*Action 12.7:
Increase the Equity Circle resource list to include additional resources on employees with disabili-
ties and employees of color with disabilities.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Update list by September 2023. Continue monitoring participant feedback and documenting how it
is considered.

*Action 12.8:
Engage with employees with disabilities to connect them to opportunities to participate on interview
panels and mock interviews in order to gain experience and build skills related to the hiring
process.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting actions and outcomes by August 2023.

*Action 12.9:
Review and update all public facing messages, such as job postings and employee resource
pages, regarding disabilities, including accommodations information, right to access services, and
employment opportunities. One focus of the updates will be to ensure the use of positive, affirming
language around accommodations requests. All employees and managers will know how to
request accommodations and understand the process.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources
Initial milestones and next steps:
Collect data to identify priority accommodations information to provide by October 2024.


                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 44
*Action 12.10:
Consult with a specialist on disability inclusion to review the reasonable accommodations process
and request recommendations.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin consultation process by June 2024. Document recommendations and how recommendations
are considered.

Challenge 13: Per Workday demographics, people of color are underrepresented in manage-
ment positions higher than a PEM B/Supervisor 1.

Action 13.1:
Offer members of the Contributions and Recovery leadership team as mentors for employees in
the Leaders of Color Empowerment Group first and other groups as needed.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Contributions and Recovery
Initial milestones and next steps:
Establish list of interested Contributions and Recovery leaders by September 2023. Contact first
Empowerment Group by October 2023. Equity and Inclusion Office will ask Empowerments Group
for feedback on the process and career progression.

*Action 13.2:
Provide at least four all-staff learning opportunities and four all-staff communications related to
people of color in management. The learning opportunities will include a virtual or recorded option
that staff can consume at various times and locations.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Complete all actions by June 2025. Request employee feedback and document how feedback is
considered.




                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 45
*Action 13.3:
Create one or more Empowerment Groups focused on managers of color. All Empowerment
Groups focused on managers of color will have active executive-level sponsorship and
participation. The groups will provide connection to mentors and a safe space to raise concerns,
questions, and ideas related to people of color in higher-level management.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
First group was created February 2023. Monitor implementation and participant feedback.

*Action 13.4:
Solicit regular input and feedback from managers of color, which may include all-staff surveys and
targeted focus groups.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin soliciting input by July 2023 on workplace inclusion, challenges, and opportunities and
release all-staff survey by October 2023. Document feedback and how feedback is considered.

*Action 13.5:
Engage with employees and communities of color to connect them to opportunities to participate
on interview panels or mock interviews in order to gain experience and build skills related to the
hiring process.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting implementation and employee outcomes by August 2023.

*Action 13.6:
Actively promote trainings to employees of color that will prepare them for higher-level supervisory
management roles, such as on budget and program management.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting by August 2023.



                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 46
*Action 13.7:
Increase recruitment strategies, with a focus on direct engagement with Oregon’s communities
of color (including within other state agencies) to build trust and engage potential applicants. HR
recruitment team will partner with hiring managers and Workforce Operations Business Services
team to curate and expand outreach and recruitment efforts. Any established process will be
included in the manager toolkit for agency wide consistency and applicability.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin documenting by August 2023; complete goal by June 2025.
Establish partnership with Workforce Operations Business Services Team and 10 organizations
that serve communities of color by June 2025. Track applicant and hiring demographics and re-
spond to trends.

*Action 13.8:
Continue checking all higher-level supervisory management applicant pools halfway through the
application period to ensure at least proportionate (30%) representation of applicants of color. If
there is not proportionate representation, we will use strategies such as extending the application
period, advertising the position with professionals of color, etc.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Human Resources
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; lead recruiters will document the process and share with agency managers by
December 2023.

Action 13.9:
Offer members of Modernization leadership team as mentors for employees in the Leaders of Color
Empowerment Group first and other groups as needed.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Modernization
Initial milestones and next steps:
Contact first Empowerment Group by October 2023. Equity and Inclusion Office will ask Empower-
ments Group for feedback on the process and career progression.




                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 47
Service Delivery
Challenge 14: Communities face structural and systemic barriers in accessing our
programs and services

Action 14.1:
Engage in in-depth training curriculum within Communications Office to learn about inclusive
communications, including racial equity, language access, and access for people with disabilities
Division or team responsible for the action:
Communications
Initial milestones and next steps:
Start training by December 2023. Complete at least three trainings by June 2025. Survey
participants to measure outcomes and document how feedback is considered.

Action 14.2:
Conduct focus groups with frontline Contributions and Recovery staff to learn where customers
are experiencing barriers.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Contributions and Recovery
Initial milestones and next steps:
Conduct first focus group by January 2024. Document feedback and how it is considered.

Action 14.3:
Convene staff across the agency who are involved in language translations to share successes
and strategies for overcoming barriers
Division or team responsible for the action:
Equity and Inclusion Office
Initial milestones and next steps:
Host first meeting by April 2024. Document feedback and how it is considered.

Action 14.4:
In collaboration with EIO and Communications, develop and implement website accessibility pro-
cess and identify language access needs for internal and external agency programs and services.
Division or team responsible for the action:
IT
Initial milestones and next steps:
Research is ongoing; implement website accessibility tool by June 2025.

                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 48
Action 14.5:
Identify technology needs and challenges for external customers and use our Equity Framework to
mitigate identified barriers and improve services.
Division or team responsible for the action:
IT
Initial milestones and next steps:
Establish a collaborative IT support response process for public facing divisions with Equity and
Inclusion partner and Universal Access Coordinator by December 2023. Document lessons learned
and how feedback is considered.

Action 14.6:
Create evaluative tools for Paid Leave Oregon policy and rulemaking, internal processes, and con-
tinuous improvement to center equity.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon
Initial milestones and next steps:
Create tools by June 2024. Track success through ongoing quarterly employee engagement sur-
veys and give recommendations based on results
Meet weekly with Exec level managers, and quarterly with teams to listen for feedback.

Action 14.7:
Build surveys or facilitate community-led focus groups to collect feedback on Paid Leave Oregon
service delivery.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin surveys or focus groups by January 2024. Track success through ongoing monthly commu-
nity-based engagement meetings and give quarterly recommendations based on results.

Action 14.8:
Train Paid Leave Oregon staff on service delivery topics such as racial equity; trauma-informed
practices; and confidentiality specific to survivors of sexual assault, domestic violence, stalking,
and harassment.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Paid Leave Oregon



                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 49
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting by June 2023. Track success through ongoing quarterly employee
engagement surveys and give recommendations based on results.

Action 14.9:
Provide one-on-one guidance at in-person and virtual outreach events to help underserved
communities navigate the UI system. Document community needs and take action to reduce barri-
ers whenever possible.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin documenting by June 2023. Document community feedback and how it is considered.

Action 14.10:
Conduct plain language review and translate the updated initial UI claim into the languages
specified within the Employment Department’s Language Access Procedure. These translations
will go live in the modernized Frances Online system, which is replacing UI’s legacy system.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance
Initial milestones and next steps:
Plan to go live in Spanish by March 2024. Plan to go live in remaining languages by
December 2024.

Action 14.11:
Conduct plain language review and translate the UI monetary determination form (form 196) and
accompanying advisements into Spanish, at a minimum, and additional languages specified within
the Employment Department’s Language Access Procedure depending on funding. These
translations will go live in the modernized Frances Online system, which is replacing UI’s
legacy system.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance
Initial milestones and next steps:
Plan to go live in Spanish by March 2024. Plan to go live in remaining languages by May 2025.




               Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 50
Action 14.12:
Translate the ten most common UI benefits communications into Spanish and additional languages
specified within the Employment Department’s Language Access Procedure depending on
funding. These translations will go live in the modernized Frances Online system, which is
replacing UI’s legacy system.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance
Initial milestones and next steps:
Plan to go live by May 2025.

Action 14.13:
Incorporate disparate impact analyses into future projects for identifying fraudulent UI claims.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance
Initial milestones and next steps:
Conduct first disparate impact analysis by December 2024. Identify any trends and responses
to trends.

Action 14.14:
Continue analyzing UI customer data across different identities and communities to check that all
agency customers receive equitable outcomes. Present findings and recommendations to UI divi-
sion leadership twice a year.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance
Initial milestones and next steps:
Present first analysis to division leadership by July 2023. Identify and trends and responses
to trends.

Action 14.15:
Contract with a vendor to implement as many Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.1
standards as possible at unemployment.oregon.gov.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Unemployment Insurance
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin contracting process by July 2023.  



                Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 51
Action 14.16:
Share aggregate data with Equity and Inclusion Office quarterly and annually on customer discrimi-
nation complaints received related to disability, race, gender, etc.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Universal Access Coordinator
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin by December 2023. Identify any areas of concern or trends and document responses.

Action 14.17:
Leverage partnerships with educational institutions and industry associations to increase aware-
ness and access to Labor Market Information.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce and Economic Research
Initial milestones and next steps:
Ongoing; begin documenting by July 2023. Track partnerships and formalize collaborations with
ten organizations by June 2025.

Action 14.18:
Identify customers’ language access needs for Labor Market information and related research.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce and Economic Research
Initial milestones and next steps:
Complete all actions by December 2024. Document responses to customer needs.

Action 14.19:
Create additional “I Speak” cards as a resource for people who need language assistance at Work-
force Operations events and in the field.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin distributing cards in every WorkSource office, on our website, and during outreach events by
December 2023.

Action 14.20:
Review the DEI Plan and Equity Framework on a quarterly basis within Workforce Operations.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations

               Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 52
Initial milestones and next steps:
Begin quarterly reviews by August 2023. Request employee feedback and document how it is
considered at least twice a year.

Action 14.21:
Create Universal Access Navigators in WorkSource centers to assist with equitable service
delivery.
Division or team responsible for the action:
Workforce Operations
Initial milestones and next steps:
Select and provide training to navigators by December 2023. Survey employees and document
how feedback is considered at least twice a year.




              Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 53
English
The Oregon Employment Department (OED) is an equal opportunity agency.
OED provides free help so you can use our services. Some examples are sign
language and spoken-language interpreters, written materials in other languages,
large print, audio, and other formats. To get help, please call 503-947-1444. TTY
users call 711. You can also send an email to communications@employ.oregon.gov.


Spanish
El Departamento de Empleo de Oregon (OED) es una agencia de igualdad
de oportunidades. El OED proporciona ayuda gratuita para que usted pueda
utilizar nuestros servicios. Algunos ejemplos son intérpretes de lengua de señas
e idiomas hablados, materiales escritos en otros idiomas, letra grande, audio y
otros formatos. Para obtener ayuda, por favor llame al 503-947-1444. Usuarios
de TTY pueden llamar al 711. También puede enviar un correo electrónico a
communications@employ.oregon.gov.

Russian
Управление занятости штата Орегон (OED) является агентством по
обеспечению равных возможностей. Управление занятости штата
Орегон (OED) оказывает бесплатную помощь, чтобы вы могли
воспользоваться нашими услугами. В качестве примера можно привести
услуги сурдо- и устных переводчиков, предоставление письменных
материалов на других языках, материалов с использованием крупного
шрифта, а также материалов в аудио- и других форматах. Если вам
требуется помощь, позвоните по телефону 503-947-1444. Пользователи
телетайпа могут позвонить по номеру 711. Вы также можете направить
нам электронное сообщение по эл. почте: communications@employ.oregon.gov.




             Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 54
Vietnamese
Cơ quan Việc làm của Tiểu bang Orego (Oregon Employment Department,
OED) là một cơ quan cung cấp cơ hội công bằng. OED cung cấp trợ giúp miễn
phí để quý vị có thể sử dụng các dịch vụ của chúng tôi. Trong đó bao gồm thông
dịch viên ngôn ngữ ký hiệu và ngôn ngữ nói, các tài liệu bằng văn bản với các
ngôn ngữ khác, bản in khổ lớn, âm thanh và các định dạng khác. Để được trợ
giúp, vui lòng gọi 503-947-1444. Người dùng TTY xin gọi 711. Quý vị cũng có thể
gửi email tới communications@employ.oregon.gov.


Simplified Chinese
“Oregon州就业部 (OED)”是一个提供均等机会的机构。OED提供免费帮助，便于
您使用我们的服务。服务内容示例包括手语和口语翻译、其他语种的书面材料、大
字体、音频以及其他格式文档。如需帮助，请致电503-947-1444。TTY用户请拨打
711。您也可以发送电子邮件至 communications@employ.oregon.gov。


Traditional Chinese
「Oregon州就業部 (OED)」是壹個提供均等機會的機構。OED提供免費幫助，便於
您使用我們的服務。服務內容示例包括手語和口語翻譯、其他語種的書面材料、大
字體、音頻和其他格式文檔。如需幫助，請致電503-947-1444。TTY用戶請撥打711。
您還可以發送電子郵件至 communications@employ.oregon.gov。


Korean
오레곤 주 고용부(OED)는 기회균등 기관입니다. OED는 서비스를 이용할 수 있도록
무료로 도움을 제공합니다. 일부 예시로는 수화, 통역 서비스, 다른 언어 번역 서비스,
큰 활자, 오디오 및 기타 형식의 자료 제공 서비스 등이 있습니다. 도움이 필요하시다면,
503-947-1444로 연락 주시기 바라며, TTY 사용자는 711로 연락주십시오. 또한
communications@employ.oregon.gov로 이메일을 보낼 수 있습니다.


Laotian
ກົົມຈັັດງງານແຫ່່ງລັັດອໍໍຣີີກອນ (OED) ຄືືໜ່່ວຍງານໃຫ້້ໂອກາດຢ່່າງເທົ່່າທຽມກັັນ. OED
ຈັັດໃຫ້້ມີີການຊ່່ວຍເຫຼືືອທີ່່ບໍ່່ເສຍຄ່່າ ເພື່່ອວ່່າທ່່ານຈະສາມາດໃຊ້້ບໍໍລິິການຂອງພວກເຮົົາ. ບາງ
ຕົົວຢ່່າງແມ່່ນລ່່າມແປພາສາມືື ແລະ ພາສາເວົ້້າ, ເນື້້ອຫາລາຍລັັກອັັກສອນເປັັນ ພາສາອື່່ນໆ,
ແບບພິິມໃຫຍ່່, ສຽງ ແລະ ຮູູບ ແບບອື່່ນໆ. ເພື່່ອຮັັບການຊ່່ວຍເຫຼືືອ, ກະລຸຸນາໂທຫາ 503-947-
1444. ຜູ້້�ໃຊ້້ TTY ໂທ 711. ທ່່ານຍັັງສາມາດສົ່່ງອີີເມວໄປຫາ communications@employ.
oregon.gov.

              Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 55
Amharic
የኦሬጎን የቅጥር መምሪያ (The Oregon Employment Department, OED) የእኩል እድል
ኤጀንሲ ነው። አገልግሎቶቻችንን መጠቀም እንዲችሉ OED ነፃ እገዛን ይሰጣል። አንዳንድ ምሳሌዎች
የምልክት ቋንቋ እና የንግግር ቋንቋ አስተርጓሚዎች፣ በሌሎች ቋንቋዎች የተጻፉ ጽሑፎች፣ ትልቅ
ህትመት፣ ኦዲዮ እና ሌሎች ቅርጸቶች ናቸው። እገዛ ለማግኘት፣ እባክዎ በ 503-947-1444
ይደውሉ። የTTY ተጠቃሚዎች 711 ይደውላሉ። ወደ communications@employ.oregon.gov
ኢሜይል መላክም ይችላሉ።

Arabic
.‫) وكالة متكافئة الفرص‬The Oregon Employment Department (OED)( ‫إدارة توظيف والية أوريغون‬
      ‫ تشمل بعض األمثلة مترجمين فوريين للغة‬.‫ مساعدة مجانية بحيث يمكنك استخدام خدماتنا‬OED ‫تقدم‬
  .‫اإلشارة واللغات المنطوقة ومواد مكتوبة بلغات أخرى ومطبوعات كبيرة الخط وملفات صوتية وصيغ أخرى‬
 ‫ يتصل مستخدمو الهاتف النصي على‬.947-1444-‎503 ‫ يرجى االتصال على الرقم‏‬،‫للحصول على مساعدة‬
     .communications@employ.oregon.gov ‫ض ا إرسال رسالة بريد إلكتروني إلى‬   ً ‫ يمكنك أي‬.711 ‫الرقم‬


Persian (Farsi)
    ‫ کمک رایگان ارائه می دهد تا‬OED .‫) یک مؤسسه ارائه فرصت ب رابر است‬OED( ‫اداره اشتغال اورگان‬
  ،‫ چاپ درشت‬،‫ مفاد کتبی به سایر زبان ها‬،‫ زبان اشاره و مترجمان شفاهی‬.‫بتوانید از خدمات استفاده کنید‬
   -947-503 ‫ ب رای دریافت کمک لطف ا ً با شماره‬.‫صوتی و سایر قالب ها مثال های از این کمک ها هستند‬
communications@ ‫ می توانید به ادرس‬.‫ تماس بگیرند‬711 ‫ با شماره‬TTY ‫ کارب ران‬.‫ تماس بگیرید‬1444
                                                                 .‫ ایمیل بزنید‬employ.oregon.gov


Somali
Waaxda Shaqaalaynta ee Oregon (The Oregon Employment Department, OED) waa
wakaalad leh fursad loo siman yahay. OED waxay ku siineysaa caawimo bilaash
ah si aad u isticmaasho adeegyadeena. Tusaalooyinka qaarkood waa luqadda
dhegoolaha iyo tarjumaannada luuqada lagu hadlo, agab ku qoran afaf kale, far
waaweyn, maqal iyo qaabab kale. Si aad u hesho caawimo, fadlan wac 503-947-
1444. Isticmaalayaasha TTY waca 711. Waxaad sidoo kale iimaayl u diri kartaa
communications@employ.oregon.gov.




                  Oregon Employment Department | Oregon.gov/Employ | EDPUB225 | Page 56
oregon.gov/employ
   EDPUB225
      0623
