    Strategic Think Tank



       July 30-31, 2024
Eaglewood Resort & Spa, Itasca, IL




                1
7/10/24

Dear ASA Strategic Planning Team,

As part of our commitment to ASA growth and sustainability, we invite you to engage deeply with our
upcoming Strategic Think Tank session.

Strategic planning is a systematic process for envisioning a desired future and translating this vision
into broadly defined goals and objectives that provides the foundation for an annual operating plan. In
organizations, strategic planning involves aligning the company's mission, vision, and values with
strategies to move towards long-term success. It considers both internal and external environments to
identify strategic directions, allocate resources, and set measurable goals. The process encourages
forward-thinking as well as historical reflections, helps in decision-making, and ensures that the
organization remains proactive rather than reactive in its approach to challenges and opportunities.

To ensure the productivity and effectiveness of our discussions, we have prepared this Briefing Book
that encompasses a comprehensive overview of relevant data, including interview and survey insights
from sr. leadership as well as general members (and non-members) that reflect future assumptions,
external conditions, internal environment—even historical elements—all in the service of our new
strategic plan.

In preparation for our time together we request that each of you:

    •   Review the content and substance of this Briefing Book. Highlight key issues that stand out.
    •   Review the exercises and the data that supports each of them. Begin filling out the templates.
    •   Highlight and make notes within your assigned section of the Briefing Book.
    •   Participate in a virtual pre Strategic Think Tank Briefing (Scheduled: 3:00pm EST on 7/25/24)
    •   Be ready to hit the ground running during our time together.

These preliminary steps will enable us to approach our strategic planning with a well-rounded
understanding of our current circumstances, informed perspectives, and innovative ideas. Your insights
and contributions will be invaluable to shaping the future direction of ASA.

Thank you for your dedication and commitment to our collective success.

I look forward to our time together in Itasca. If you have any questions prior to our Strategic Think Tank,
please don’t hesitate to reach out.

Sincerely,




Bruce H. Jackson
Table of Contents

Schedule (Day 1)                        4
Schedule (Day 2)                        5
Retreat Objectives                      6
Attendee’s                              7
Facilitator Biography                   9
About ASA                               10
Cover Story                             10
Competitor/Collaborator Analysis        11
Assumptions About The Future (STEEPI)   16
SWOT (Strengths & Weaknesses)           26
SWOT (Opportunities & Threats)          38
Key Issues & Challenges                 45
Key Issues & Challenges Evaluation      52
Creative Thinking Dots                  58
Initiative Prioritization               59
ASA Core Purpose Review                 66
Notes                                   67
Appendix A: Quantitative Data           69
Schedule (Pre-Think Tank): Monday
   6:00 – 8:00     Opening Reception (Burnham’s Private Room)


Schedule (Day 1): Tuesday
   Time            Program Section

   6:30 – 7:30     Breakfast (Burnham’s Restaurant)
   7:30 – 8:00     Registration
   8:30 – 8:50     Welcome & Opening Remarks
   8:50 – 9:30     Introductions & Objectives

                   FUTURE ENVISIONING
   9:30 – 10:15    Strategy Session #1: Ideal Future State
   10:15 – 11:00   Future State Group Reports
   10:45—11:00     Break

                   CURRENT REALITY, MARKET AWARENESS & POSITION OPTIMIZING
   11:00 – 11:15   State of the Association
   11:15 – 11:30   Strategy Session #2: Competitor/Collaborator Analysis
   11:30 – 11:50   Strategy Session #3: Competitive Advantages
   11:50 – 12:30   Lunch (Burnham’s Restaurant)

                   ASSUMPTIONS, TRENDS & STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS
   12:30 – 1:15    Strategy Session #4: Future Assumptions (STEEPI)
    1:15 – 1:45    STEEPI Analysis/Trends Group Reports
    1:45 – 2:00    Strategy Session #5: Strengths & Weaknesses (Internal)
    2:00 – 2:15    Opportunities & Threats (External)
    2:15 – 2:30    Break

                   ISSUES, CHALLENGES & STRATEGIC EXPLORATIONS
    2:30 – 3:00    Strategy Session #6: Key Issues/Challenges & ID
    3:00 – 3:30    Key Issues/Challenges & Impact Ranking
    3:30 – 4:15    Strategic Session #7: Strategic Initiative Identification
    4:15 – 4:45    Strategic Initiative Sorting and Theming
    4:45 – 5:00    Summary of the Day
    6:00 – 7:00    Reception (Brown Break Area)
    7:00 – 8:0     Dinner (Hazelnut)




                                            4
Schedule (Day 2): Wednesday
 Time            Program Section

 8:00 – 8:30     Breakfast (Burnham’s Restaurant)

 8:30 – 8:45     Re-Cap of Day 1


                 STRATEGIC ARTICULATION & FOCUS
 8:45 – 9:00     Strategy Session #8: Strategic Initiative Prioritization
 9:00 – 9:15     Strategic Initiative Resource Allocation
 9:15 – 9:45     Strategy Session #9: Initiative Problem Articulation. Initiative #1
 9:44 – 10:15    Initiative Problem Articulation. Initiative #2
 10:15 – 10:30   Break

 10:30 – 11:00   Problem Articulation. Initiative #3
 11:00 – 11:30   Initiative Problem Articulation. Initiative #4

                 STRATEGIC EXECUTION & IDENTITY REFINEMENTS
 11:30 – 11:45   Strategy Session #10: Mission/Purpose & Values Ideas Capture
 11:45 – 12:00   Process Review & Next Steps (5-Alignments)
 12:00 – 12:15   Closing Remarks

 12:30 – 1:30    Lunch (Burnham’s Restaurant: “To-Go” Boxes)




                                              5
Retreat Objectives

   •   Consensus around our ideal future state (3 years out)
   •   Clarify our Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities & Threats
   •   Understand our competitive/collaborative environment
   •   Discuss our optimal position and brand promise
   •   Explore and discuss key issues & challenges
   •   Identify and prioritize strategic initiatives
   •   Determine a picture of success for our priority initiatives
   •   Identify possible success metrics / outcomes




                                     Opportunities
                                        Threats
                                       Key Issues




           Wins                                                                        Ideal
          Lessons
                                      Strategic                                      Future
        Assumptions
                                       Focus                                          State




                                       Strengths
                                      Weaknesses
                                       Key Issues
                                                                     © copyright Attentional Leadership™ Institute, 2024. All Rights Reserved.




                                        6
Attendees
            Andrea Arguelles                           John Hildebrand                      Peggy Nelson
      Pennsylvania State University           University of California, San Diego     University of Minnesota
           arguelles@psu.edu                       jahildebrand@ucsd.edu               peggynelson@umn.edu
            Kelly Benoit-Bird                        Matthew Hildebrand                     Tyrone Porter
    Monterey Bay Aquarium Research                   Wenger Corporation              University of Texas at Austin
                 Institute                    matt.hildebrand@wengercorp.com             tmp6@utexas.edu
             kbb@mbari.org
               Virginia Best                            Christy Holland                     Kimberly Riegel
            Boston University                       University of Cincinnati         Farmingdale State University
             ginbest@bu.edu                        hollanck@ucmail.uc.edu              riegelk@farmingdale.edu
           Nancy Blair-DeLeon                             Paul Hursky                          Zane Rusk
      Acoustical Society of America                 Applied Ocean Sciences           Pennsylvania State University
   nblairdeleon@acousticalsociety.org               paul.hursky@gmail.com                    ztr4@psu.edu
              Braxton Boren                            Bruce H. Jackson                      Daniel Russell
           American University                 Attentional Leadership Institute      Pennsylvania State University
          boren@american.edu                  bruce@attentionalleadership.com              dar119@psu.edu
              Suzanne Boyce                              Ana Jaramillo                Barbara Shinn-Cunningham
         University of Cincinnati                     Olson Sound Design              Carnegie Mellon University
         boycese@ucmail.uc.edu                       ana@olsonsound.com                 bgsc@andrew.cmu.edu
              Jonas Braasch                              Trevor Jerome                       Martin Siderius
     Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute       Naval Surface Warfare Center Carderock     Portland State University
             braasj@rpi.edu                                 Division                       siderius@pdx.edu
                                                     twjerome@gmail.com
                Ann Bradlow                               Keeta Jones                        Julianna Simon
          Northwestern University                Acoustical Society of America       Pennsylvania State University
       abradlow@northwestern.edu                kjones@acousticalsociety.org                jcs516@psu.edu
              Jennifer Cooper                          Christopher Kube                   Christopher Stecker
 Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory       Pennsylvania State University         Boystown National Research
        jennifer.cooper@jhuapl.edu                      kube@psu.edu                             Hospital
                                                                                      cstecker@spatialhearing.org
            David Dall'Osto                             Andone Lavery                        Maureen Stone
       University of Washington             Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution         University of Maryland
           dallosto@uw.edu                           alavery@whoi.edu                   mstone@umaryland.edu
              Micheal Dent                               Wu-Jung Lee                        Benjamin Tucker
         University at Buffalo                    University of Washington            Northern Arizona University
         mdent@buffalo.edu                              leewj@uw.edu                   benjamin.tucker@nau.edu
             Anna Diedesch                               Stephen Lind                    Michelle Vigeant-Haas
     Western Washington University                   Lind Acoustics LLC              Pennsylvania State University
          diedesa@wwu.edu                     stephen.j.lind.ut88@gmail.com               mcv3@engr.psu.edu
               Stan Dosso                                 James Lynch                        Joseph Vignola
         University of Victoria             Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution     Catholic University of America
            sdosso@uvic.ca                            jlynch@whoi.edu                       vignola@cua.edu
             David Dowling                            Subha Maruvada                       Michael Vorländer
        University of Michigan               U.S. Food and Drug Administration          RWTH Aachen University
            drd@umich.edu                      subha.maruvada@fda.hhs.gov            mvo@akustik.rwth-aachen.de




                                                      7
             Judy Dubno                           Megan Ballard                          Lily Wang
Medical University of South Carolina       University of Texas at Austin     University of Nebraska--Lincoln
         dubnojr@musc.edu                   meganb@arlut.utexas.edu                 lilywang@unl.edu
         Geoffrey Edelmann                  Zoi-Heleni Michalopoulou                  D. Keith Wilson
     Naval Research Laboratory         New Jersey Institute of Technology   U.S. Army Engineer Research and
geoffrey.f.edelmann.civ@us.navy.mil    zoi-heleni.michalopoulou@njit.edu           Development Center
                                                                               keithwilson410@gmail.com
            Jolene Ehl                         Andrew Morrison                        Preston Wilson
   Acoustical Society of America              Joliet Junior College           University of Texas at Austin
    jehl@acousticalsociety.org                 amorriso@jjc.edu                pswilson@mail.utexas.edu
        Carol Espy-Wilson                         Xavier Mouy                         Douglas Winker
      University of Maryland           NOAA Northeast Fisheries Science                 ETS-Lindgren
         espy@umd.edu                                 Center                douglas.winker@ets-lindgren.com
                                         xavier.mouy@outlook.com
            Susan Fox                            Christina Naify                    David Woolworth
   Acoustical Society of America         University of Texas at Austin      Roland, Woolworth & Associates,
    sfox@acousticalsociety.org            christina.naify@gmail.com                          LLC
                                                                            dwoolworth@rwaconsultants.net
           Joseph Gladden                      Tracianne Neilsen                          Jie Yang
           Tufts University                Brigham Young University              University of Washington
       jrgladden@gmail.com                  traci.neilsen@byu.edu             jieyang@apl.washington.edu
                                                                                      Pavel Zahorik
                                                                                  University of Louisville
                                                                              pavel.zahorik@louisville.edu




                                               8
Facilitator Biography
Dr. Bruce H. Jackson has dedicated his career to the development of
individuals, teams, organizations, and communities that seek to
maximize influence, leadership, and change.

Bruce is the founder of The Attentional Leadership Institute—a strategy,
training, assessment, and coaching firm dedicated to helping individuals,
teams, and organizations achieve peak performance. He wrote Finding
Your Flow: How to Identify Your Flow Assets and Liabilities—the Keys to
Peak Performance Every Day to increase awareness, clarify driving
principles, and engage in strategic and focused change.

Formerly a Principal Consultant with Korn Ferry/Hay Group, Director of the Center for the Advancement of
Leadership, Principal with InsideOut Development, Associate with Learning Strategies Corporation, and
consultant for BlueEQ, Bruce works with national and global associations, Fortune 500 companies,
colleges/universities, civic, and non-profit institutions to develop and implement principles of performance,
leadership, and change—for professionals, students, and public servants alike. On the side of philanthropy, Dr.
Jackson directs the C. Charles Jackson Foundation and Charlie Life & Leadership Academy—advancing
leadership centers, programs, online training, and research throughout the world to develop a new
generation of emerging leaders.

Bruce earned his doctorate in Human and Organizational Systems from Fielding Graduate University, where his
research led to the development of Attentional Leadership Theory™ (ALT)—a holistic and multi-dimensional
approach to categorize and implement leadership theories, tools, and practices for leaders at all ages.

Prior to achieving this distinction, he earned master’s degrees in counseling psychology (Boston University),
Business Administration (University of Minnesota, Carlson School of Management), Organizational
Development (Fielding Graduate University), and Public Administration (Harvard University, John F. Kennedy
School of Government)—all of which provided a broad and deep understanding of human capacity building,
leadership development, and organization effectiveness within diverse arenas.

Bruce, his wife Marta, and their three children currently live in Highland, UT




                                                      9
ASA Core Purpose
The purpose of the Society is to generate, disseminate, and promote the
knowledge and practical applications of acoustics.


Cover Story
Instructions:

During this exercise we will envision ASA and its accomplishments at the end of this three-year strategic plan.
Note: We will complete this exercise in groups during the Strategic Think Tank.




At the very top of our game ASA will:

             •   _______________________________________________________________________________

             •   _______________________________________________________________________________

             •   _______________________________________________________________________________



  Brainstorm: for documenting initial ideas for the        Sidebars: reveal interesting facets of the cover story
  cover story                                              Quotes: can be from anyone, as long as they are
  Cover: tells the BIG story of your success               related to the story Images: for supporting the
  Headlines: convey the substance of your cover            content with illustrations
  story                                                    Sentence Extensions: Expressions of achievements.




                                                      10
11
12
13
Instructions:
Please identify any other Direct, Indirect, or Substitute competitors that are not listed above.

                                        Other Competitors:




Please identify potential Collaborators that ASA might consider partnering with and for what purpose. We
will discuss as a large group.

                                      Potential Collaborators:




                                                   14
Inner Stakeholder Interview & Survey Summary
Who or what competes for ASA resources, attention or participation (directly or
indirectly)? These may include other associations (global, national or regional),
specific businesses, continuing education providers, publishers, website-based
resources, etc.

   •   Association for Research in Otolaryngology (ARO): Large and engaged membership with a
       high journal impact factor, but limited opportunities for article revisions and high
       publication costs.
   •   Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology (JARO): Strong academic
       network and comprehensive resource library, facing high publication costs and limited
       geographical presence.
   •   Society for Neuroscience (SfN): Known for its large organization and active support for
       undergraduate education, but hindered by large meeting sizes and expensive registration
       fees.
   •   American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA): Large association with free color
       figures for publications, yet weaker in scientific research focus.
   •   IEEE Oceanic Engineering Society (OES): Industry connections and networking
       opportunities, challenged by high membership fees and costly meeting locations.
   •   International Society for Computational Biology (ISCB): Focus on speech technology and
       interdisciplinary collaboration, but less emphasis on clinical applications.
   •   American Auditory Society (AAS): Focused on clinical and translational research with
       strong practitioner support, but less recognized for scientific rigor.
   •   Institute of Noise Control Engineering (INCE): Specializes in noise effects and control, with
       a practical application focus but limited in broader acoustics topics.
   •   Marine Mammal Society (MMS): Strong marine acoustics focus with engaged researchers,
       but smaller scale and less interdisciplinary events compared to ASA.




                                              15
Assumptions About The Future (STEEPI)
Pre-Think Tank Worksheet

Introduction:

This exercise is designed to solicit your assumptions about the future environment in which ASA will operate.
In completing the worksheet, think about the next 3 to 5 years and list, by category, what you think we may
encounter and need to prepare.

The exercise is broken into 6 separate categories: socio-demographic, technological, economic, environmental,
political, and industry.

Key Terms:

Socio-Demographic: Analysis of population groups and their changing characteristics like age, ethnicity, and
education. It informs about consumers and workforce dynamics.

Technological: Involves the impact of new technologies on products, services, and operations, shaping
competitive practices and organizational change.

Environmental: Concerns the interaction between organization and the natural world, focusing on
sustainability, environmental impact, and regulatory compliance.

Economic: Examines the financial health and market conditions, including trends, policies, inflation, and
employment, which influence organization decisions.

Political: Considers the influence of government actions, law, political stability, and policy on organizational
strategy and operations.

Industry: Looks at trends and challenges within a specific sector, including competition, regulations, and market
structure.

Instructions:

In preparation for your upcoming strategy development session, please review the interview and survey data \
below, which are current assumptions summarized by category. After your review, what assumptions do you
think are most important for each category in the future? During the strategy development session, we will identify
potential impacts. It is NOT necessary to complete the Impact section now.




                                                           16
             SOCIO-DEMOGRAPHIC

ASSUMPTION                       IMPACT




               TECHNOLOGICAL

ASSUMPTION                       IMPACT




                   17
              ECONOMIC

ASSUMPTION                  IMPACT




             ENVIONMENTAL

ASSUMPTION                  IMPACT




                 18
             POLITICAL

ASSUMPTION               IMPACT




             INDUSTRY

ASSUMPTION               IMPACT




               19
Inner Stakeholder Survey (current issues/challenges/dynamics)

What are the biggest strategic issues/challenges/dynamics facing the industry/field
today? Think broadly about different themes (Socio-Demographic, Technology,
Environmental, Economic, Political, Industry trends, etc.). List from most to least
important:

 Socio-Demographic

   •   Membership and Engagement:
          o Declining membership, especially among younger demographics.
          o Enhancing the sense of belonging for underrepresented members.
          o Expanding inclusion to younger and more diverse members.
          o Retaining students in the field and recruiting new talent.
          o Promoting diversity, equity, and inclusion within the acoustics community.
   •   Education and Outreach:
          o Lack of access to good education and resources for underrepresented communities.
          o Fewer people learning the fundamentals of science and critical thinking in grade school.
          o Providing resources and opportunities for early career professionals.

 Technology

   •   Technological Advancements:
          o Incorporating AI and machine learning in beneficial ways.
          o The data revolution: being at the forefront of changes in data acquisition, storage, analysis,
             and dissemination.
          o Addressing the growth of student interest in computer science, data science, biology, and
             AI.
   •   Innovation and Research:
          o Encouraging innovation and supporting cutting-edge research.
          o Maintaining status as the #1 academic leader in the field and outstanding journals.

 Economic

   •   Financial Pressures:
           o Reduced publishing revenue and need for cost management, particularly regarding
              conference expenses.
           o Financial pressures due to changes in publications and inflation.
           o Funding issues, especially for science education and environmental/ecological research.
           o Getting fiscal management in order.
           o Diversifying revenue sources.




                                                   20
Environmental

  •   Environmental and Political Challenges:
         o Misinformation and mistrust of science among the general public.
         o Political division and opposition to equity, diversity, and inclusion initiatives.
         o Environmental impacts and lack of funding for important research.
         o Societal issues like anti-environmentalism and conspiracy theories opposing evidence-based
             science.

Political

  •   Visibility and Relevance:
          o Enhancing programs to meet the changing needs and interests of students.
          o Enhancing awareness of the role of acousticians in broad societal/environmental
               discussions.
          o Difficulty in explaining the impact of acoustics to non-acousticians.

Industry

  •   Competition and Market Dynamics:
          o Competition from other professional organizations.
          o Competing conferences and societies.
          o Maintaining and rebuilding a sense of community within the organization.
  •   Membership and Engagement:
          o Decreasing personal interaction of members.
          o Expanding inclusion to younger and more diverse members.
          o Maintaining our status as the #1 academic leader in the field and outstanding journals.
  •   Visibility and Relevance:
          o Enhancing awareness of the role of acousticians in broad societal/environmental
               discussions.
          o The data revolution: being at the forefront of changes in data acquisition, storage, analysis,
               and dissemination.

Member/Non-Member Survey & Comments




                                                  21
22
23
What do you regard as important challenges facing acoustics in the next few years?

Workforce Dynamics

   •   Skill Gaps: The field of animal bioacoustics and noise impact is skewed towards non-biologists,
       lacking appropriate biological training.
   •   Industry vs. Academia: More industry presentations than academic ones in technical sessions;
       rising costs of membership for academia.
   •   Aging Leadership: Older leaders not stepping aside for early and mid-career scientists.
   •   AI and Acoustics: Challenges in integrating AI impacts on acoustics.
   •   Hiring Issues: Difficulty finding acoustic professionals to fill positions.
   •   Public Perception: Challenges in getting the public to understand the implications of acoustics on
       real-life issues.
   •   Practical Applications: Difficulty in translating acoustic needs and goals to end users and
       integrating physical acoustics with behavior.

Research Patterns

   •   Technological Integration: Acoustical modeling software updates not keeping up with demand.
   •   Simulation vs. Reality: Over-reliance on theoretical models and simulations that may not work in
       practice.
   •   Biological Understanding: Lack of understanding of basic biology in animal bioacoustics.
   •   Collaboration: Need for improved collaboration with government stakeholders and other
       organizations.
   •   Multidisciplinary Integration: Lack of integration between biologists and physicists.
   •   Funding and Support: Insufficient funding for research, especially in sonar and noise control.

What do you regard as important issues for ASA over the next several years?

Strategic Focus

   •   Certification: Introduction of an acoustic certification demonstrating different levels of knowledge.
   •   Industry and Consulting: Increasing emphasis on industry and consulting roles within ASA.
   •   Diversity and Inclusion: Attracting underrepresented minorities to the profession and increasing
       demographic diversity in acoustics.
   •   Technology and Innovation: Emphasizing the role of AI and cloud computing in acoustics, and
       improving the impact factor of JASA.

Operational Improvements

   •   Meeting Costs and Accessibility: Reducing the cost of meetings and ensuring they are equitably
       distributed and accessible to all members.




                                                    24
   •   Virtual Presence: Enhancing virtual meeting options and presence at ASA.
   •   International Outreach: Increasing international attractivity and outreach, and holding more
       meetings outside of the USA.

Engagement and Collaboration

   •   Public Engagement: Raising public awareness about acoustics and improving communication with
       the public.
   •   Academic and Industry Connection: Bridging the gap between academia and industry, and
       involving more military and contractors.
   •   Early Career Support: Inviting more professionals to become full members and providing more
       opportunities for early career acousticians.

Financial Sustainability

   •   Funding Opportunities: Lobbying for more funding opportunities and capturing datasets for future
       research.
   •   Membership Value: Ensuring the value of membership remains high and relevant to members’
       needs.

Policy and Standards

   •   Standards Development: Increasing involvement in international standardization and updating
       acoustical standards.
   •   Regulatory Engagement: More engagement with regulatory agencies to update and implement
       acoustical standards.




                                                  25
SWOT Analysis (Strengths & Weaknesses)
Pre-Think Tank Worksheet

Introduction:

A SWOT Analysis is a strategic planning tool used to identify and understand the Strengths, Weaknesses,
Opportunities, and Threats related to association competition or project planning. In a SWOT Analysis, strengths and
weaknesses are often internal to the organization, while opportunities and threats are usually external. The analysis
helps board members and management understand where they stand in the competitive landscape and what strategic
moves they might consider to enhance their position.

Key Terms:

Strengths: Characteristics of the organization or project that give it an advantage over others. These are internal
factors that contribute positively to achieving the organization's objectives. Examples: A strong brand, a dedicated
customer base, unique technology, or superior quality products.

Weaknesses: Characteristics that place the organization or project at a disadvantage relative to others. These are
internal factors that might hinder the achievement of an objective. Examples: Stale conference topics, a weak brand
name, poor reputation among members, or limited resources.

Instructions:

This exercise is designed to explore ASA Strengths and Weaknesses. Please review the staff assessment as well as the
survey data below and highlight or make note of the most important themes that you see in each category. Please add
additional Strengths and Weaknesses that you think may have been missed:

Opportunities: External chances to improve performance in the environment. These are external factors that the
association could exploit to its advantage. Examples: An unfulfilled customer need, arrival of new technologies,
loosening of regulations, or a market vacuum.

Threats: External challenges that could cause trouble for the organization or project. These are external factors that
could cause problems or damage the organization’s or project's ability to meet its objectives. Examples: An economic
downturn, increased regulation, new competitors entering the market, or changes in consumer behavior that reduce
demand




                                                          26
           Strengths:                                             Weaknesses

     Member Engagement and Dedication:                            Retention of Student Members:

•   ASA members are deeply invested in the                •   Difficulty in retaining student members for
    society and contribute significantly to its               the long term.
    success through various roles such as
    leadership positions, committees, and
    editorial responsibilities.

       Collegial and Welcoming Environment:                    Resistance to Change and Innovation:

•   The society is known for its collegial and            •   A tendency to be overly cautious with
    welcoming nature, fostering a strong sense                change and innovation, which may hinder
    of community and belonging among its                      growth and adaptability.
    members.

       Technical Diversity and Excellence:                              Siloed Information:

•   ASA covers a broad range of technical areas           •   Information within the organization may
    in acoustics, showcasing its diversity and                have a tendency to be siloed, leading to
    expertise.                                                communication barriers and inefficiencies.
•   The society produces high-quality
    publications that contribute significantly to         Financial Stability and Revenue Diversification:
    its mission and reputation.
                                                          •   While finances have been improving, there is
        Dedicated and Experienced Staff:                      a need for increased focus on financial
                                                              stability by diversifying revenue sources and
                                                              implementing budget cuts where necessary.
•   ASA benefits from a dedicated and
    experienced staff that plays a crucial role in            Membership Growth and Engagement:
    the smooth operation and success of the
    society.
                                                          •   Challenges in increasing and retaining
    Meetings and Networking Opportunities:                    membership, particularly among early career
                                                              acousticians.
•   ASA meetings are highly valued for their              •   Many programs do not require membership,
    intimate and interactive nature, providing                reducing the incentive for individuals to join
                                                              and remain active in ASA.




                                                     27
    excellent networking opportunities for
    members.

            Volunteer Contributions:                             Communication and Outreach:

•   Volunteers are a key strength of ASA,                •   Difficulties in communication with and
    contributing significantly to the society’s              between chapters, leading to a lack of
    initiatives and activities.                              awareness about different activities and
                                                             initiatives.
                                                         •   Need for better promotion and marketing of
      Student Involvement and Mentoring:                     member benefits.

There is a heavy emphasis on student                     •   Sponsor and donor development and
involvement, mentoring, and engagement,                      outreach require more focus.
supporting the development of future
acousticians.
                                                         •
       Global Leadership and Governance:

•   ASA is recognized as a global leader in the          •
    field of acoustics, with a strong partnership
    between headquarters and governance.
                                                         •
       Diversity and Outreach Initiatives:

•   ASA is proactive in diversity initiatives and        •
    outreach, encouraging grassroots
    engagement and member loyalty.
                                                         •
                  Fiscal Stability:

•   Despite challenges, ASA maintains a strong           •
    and stable fiscal house, ensuring financial
    stability for the society.

          Innovation and Adaptability:

•   ASA shows a willingness to try new                   •
    programs or events more than once, making
    adjustments for improvement and
    concluding them if goals are not met.




                                                    28
 •                                                       •
 •                                                       •
 •                                                       •
 •                                                       •
 •                                                       •
 •                                                       •
 •                                                       •
 •                                                       •


Inner-Stakeholder Data (Strengths):

What value does ASA bring to its members? OR "People join because..."

Scientific Exchange:

     •   Share their science with others who have similar interests.
     •   Learn the latest breakthroughs in their own scientific area and others.
     •   Opportunity to share science and engage in scientific exchange.
     •   ASA Journal: A key resource for scientific information.

Networking Opportunities:

     •   Develop and enhance their professional network.
     •   Professional networking: Important for career development and social interactions.
     •   Community interaction: Building a sense of community and networking within the field.
     •   Conference networking: Opportunities at meetings and conferences.
     •   Social networking: Not just scientific, but also social connections.

Professional and Career Development:

     •   Career development: Opportunities for leadership training and professional growth.
     •   Professional credentialing: Listing ASA membership on CVs and resumes.
     •   Training opportunities: Especially for younger members and students.
     •   Student support: Programs and support to attend conferences.

Community and Intellectual Inspiration:




                                                    29
   •    Community: A sense of belonging and interaction with a diverse scientific community.
   •    Intellectual inspiration: Exposure to a wide range of scientific topics and discussions.
   •    Diverse scientific community: Across various career areas and expertise.

Recognition and Awards:

   •    Awards and recognition: Opportunities for recognition and support through awards.
   •    Student training: Specific programs aimed at student training and development.
   •    Leadership training: Enhancing leadership skills and experience.

Publications and Standards:

   •    Good publications: High-quality journals and other publications.
   •    Standards: ASA's role in setting measurement and environmental standards in acoustics in the US.

Additional Benefits:

   •    Opportunity to volunteer: Important for academic advancement.
   •    Prestige: The unmatched prestige of ASA in the field.
   •    Engaging students: Bringing new people and students into the profession.
   •    Access to JASA: Key resource for members.

 Most Important Reasons for Joining (Ranked)

   1.   To share their science with others who have similar interests.
   2.   To learn the latest breakthroughs in their own scientific area and others.
   3.   To develop and enhance their professional network.
   4.   For career development.
   5.   For leadership training.

What are the strengths of ASA's governing bodies? What do they do well?

Talented and Committed Leaders:

    •   Leaders are dedicated to the Society, showing high levels of engagement and commitment.

Inclusivity and Service Orientation:

    •   The governing bodies are inclusive, service-oriented, and focused on ASA's mission.
    •   They work hard to be inclusive and consider the concerns and priorities of members.

Well-structured and Efficient Operations:




                                                     30
    •   Effective division into Executive and Technical Councils, with excellent working relationships.
    •   The technical committees (TCs) bring in students and facilitate interaction with other technical
        areas.
    •   Smooth and fair leadership rotation at all levels.

Support for Strategic Initiatives:

    •   Thoughtful consideration of strategic initiatives and open discussions.
    •   Support for new ideas and programs.

Dedication to Mission and Goals:

    •   Volunteers care deeply about the mission and goals of ASA.
    •   High levels of technical work maintained through journals and support for student involvement.

What are the strengths of the internal leadership team and staff? What do they do well?

Dedication and Hard Work:

    •   The staff is small but extremely hard-working and dedicated to ASA.
    •   They are patient, professional, and respond quickly to member requests.

Knowledge and Expertise:

    •   Staff possess a wealth of knowledge and provide valuable guidance on policies and special session
        organization.

Supportive and Collaborative Culture:

   •    There is a strong culture of helpful service and support for meeting organization.
   •    Staff are well-organized, supportive, and easy to work with.

Efficiency and Effectiveness:

   •    Staff maintain a high level of efficiency and effectiveness, despite the largely volunteer-run nature
        of the society.
   •    They handle multiple tasks effectively and work collaboratively across areas.

Adaptability and Innovation:

   •    The leadership team responds well to changing times, such as implementing journal special issues,
        open access opportunities, and online conferences.




                                                     31
   •   They have successfully decreased publication times for JASA articles and worked to cut society
       costs.

Historically, what accomplishments/successes can ASA be most proud of?

Engagement and Recognition:

   •   Engagement of membership.
   •   Recognition of individual accomplishments.
   •   Career development of members.

Diverse Fields and Cross-Fertilization:

   •   Diverse fields of membership.
   •   Cross-fertilization across different areas of acoustics.

Bringing Together Acousticians:

   •   Bringing together experts from various fields including science, engineering, arts, and technology.

Longevity and Leadership:

   •   Sustaining as a leading organization for nearly 100 years despite increased competition.

Support for Students:

   •   Strong support for student members.
   •   Encouraging networking through various initiatives.

Journals and Meetings:

   •   High-quality journals and meetings.
   •   Recognized for its premiere journal (JASA) and conferences.

Promoting Diversity and Inclusion:

   •   Promoting diversity and inclusion ahead of its time.

Technical Excellence:

   •   High caliber of technical works by its members.
   •   Maintaining a healthy fiscal status that reinvests in its members.




                                                     32
Adaptability:

   •   Successfully weathering challenges, such as the pandemic, with significant efforts from ASA staff.

Scientific Support and Dissemination:

   •   Supporting outstanding science.
   •   Providing platforms for disseminating scientific information on diverse acoustics topics.

ASA can be most proud of its engagement and recognition of members, its role in bringing together a
diverse community of acousticians, its longevity and leadership in the field, strong support for students,
high-quality journals and meetings, promotion of diversity and inclusion, technical excellence, adaptability
in the face of challenges, and its support for and dissemination of scientific research in acoustics.




                                                    33
34
35
Member/Non-Member Survey Comments (Strengths):
What do you value most about your membership in ASA? (other)

   1. Professional Environment:
         o Access to a highly functional professional environment with well-run regular meetings.
         o The ASA is internationally recognized as the learned society in acoustics, providing
             collaborative engagement with top researchers and practitioners.
   2. Access to Resources:
         o Access to journals and supporting the research world.
         o Easier access to journal content and quality control of JASA.
         o Reduced registration rates at conferences and discounted conference prices.
   3. Recognition and Credentials:
         o Membership indicating a valuable level of acoustics experience for consultants.
         o Including ASA membership on professional resumes.
   4. Networking and Connections:
         o Connections with past colleagues and staying in touch with peers.
         o Opportunities to meet customers and participate in developing ANSI and ISO standards.
   5. Supporting Diversity and Standards:




                                                36
          o  Advancing diversity in acoustics.
          o  Developing and supporting standards.
   6. Learning and Development:
         o Learning more about acoustics and participating in educational activities.
         o Providing opportunities for students.
   7. Publications and Presentations:
         o Publishing articles and presenting at ASA meetings to raise practical questions in the field.
   8. Support for ASA’s Mission:
         o Supporting the aims of ASA and wanting to belong to and serve the community.
         o Supporting improved or new standards/codes.

ASA membership is valued for providing a professional environment, access to resources, recognition,
networking opportunities, support for diversity and standards, learning and development opportunities,
and support for ASA's mission. Former members cited issues with the cost-value ratio, time constraints,
and reduced benefits as reasons for their disengagement.




                                                  37
SWOT Analysis (Opportunities & Threats)
Pre-Think Tank Worksheet

Introduction:

Let’s move on into opportunities & threats…

Instructions:

This exercise is designed to explore Opportunities and Threats. Please review the survey data below and highlight or
make note of the most important themes that you see in each category. Please add additional Opportunities and/or
Threats that you think have been missed:


                Opportunities:                                         Threats:

    •                                                     •
    •                                                     •

    •                                                     •
    •                                                     •
    •                                                     •
    •                                                     •
    •                                                     •

    •                                                     •
    •                                                     •

    •                                                     •
    •                                                     •

    •                                                     •

    •                                                     •
    •                                                     •

    •                                                     •




                                                        38
•    •
•    •
•    •
•    •

•    •

•    •
•    •

•    •

•    •
•    •
•    •
•    •
•    •
•    •

•    •
•    •
•    •

•    •
•    •
•    •
•    •




    39
Inner-Stakeholder Data (Opportunities):

What do you think are the greatest opportunities for ASA to advance its mission over
the next 1-3 years?

Membership Growth and Engagement

   •   Increasing membership, particularly of younger people
   •   Concentrating on membership and younger members
   •   Efforts to make ASA more welcoming to new people
   •   Bringing in more people from non-academic sources
   •   Creating a more open, less "clique"-y atmosphere

Education and Outreach

   •   Disseminating valuable scientific information
   •   Expanding education and outreach programs
   •   Increasing scientific education to the general public
   •   New and consistently offered education programs for non-academics
   •   Educational opportunities for practitioners
   •   Availability of acoustics information and education to the public
   •   More community outreach

Diversity and Inclusion

   •   Becoming more diverse and available to under-represented communities
   •   Advances in increasing representation of minorities in acoustical careers
   •   Embracing diversity
   •   Continuing to focus on equity, diversity, and inclusion
   •   Continue to support CIRDI and ASA SURIEA program

Partnerships and Collaborations

   •   Developing stronger partnerships with disciplinary-specific organizations
   •   Connecting with industry in meaningful ways




                                                  40
Meeting and Conference Innovation

   •   Continuing to host strong meetings
   •   Re-thinking meetings to be more inclusive and less expensive
   •   Expanding meetings to involve more members and attract non-members
   •   Joint and virtual meetings
   •   Consolidating meetings for better attendance

Support for Research and Professional Development

   •   Support for research training of undergraduates
   •   Fellowships for graduate students and postdocs
   •   Encouraging interdisciplinary sessions at ASA meetings
   •   Staying relevant and flexible to address evolving scientific/technical areas

Public Outreach and Visibility

   •   Increasing public outreach efforts to raise visibility of acoustics careers
   •   Lobbying Congress for more science funding
   •   Special editions of open-access JASA

Financial Growth and Stability

   •   Gaining financial supporters, donors, sponsors

Innovation and Adaptability

   •   Lowered change resistance and re-thinking entrenched practices
   •   Staying relevant and flexible in rapidly-evolving scientific/technical areas

Accessibility and Affordability

   •   Ensuring relevance, added value, affordability, and accessibility in meetings
   •   Adding cheaper options for conferences
   •   Transitioning JASA to open access for wider readership

Scientific Advancements and Standards

   •   Incorporating acoustics criteria into building codes
   •   Exploring new areas of acoustics like agroacoustics

These themes encapsulate the diverse opportunities identified for ASA to advance its mission over
the next 1-3 years.



          Member/Non-Member Themes

                                                    41
If you could change one thing about ASA (how it operates as an organization) what
would that be?

Member/Non-Member Themes
Interaction Between Technical Committees (TCs):

   •    Increase interaction between TCs to enhance collaboration and knowledge sharing.

Conference Frequency:

    •   Change meetings to every 9 months instead of the current schedule.
    •   Hold only one conference per year.

Financial Focus:

    •   Oversight of meeting expenses to ensure cost-effectiveness.
    •   Focus on finances to thrive for another century.
          •   Get back to or close to a balanced annual budget, as significant deficits are
          unsustainable.

                                                   42
Awards Committee Oversight:

           o   Implement independent oversight of awards committee decisions to ensure fairness
               and transparency.

To improve ASA's operations, the key suggested changes include increasing interaction between
technical committees, reconsidering the frequency of conferences, enhancing financial oversight and
sustainability, and implementing independent oversight of awards committee decisions. These
changes aim to foster collaboration, ensure financial stability, and maintain fairness and
transparency within the organization.

Inner-Stakeholder Data (Threats):
What do you believe are ASA's greatest threats that it needs to be concerned about
over the next 1-3 years?

Financial Stability

   •   Budget deficits, especially related to meetings
   •   Spending/Budgetary issues
   •   Budget limitations
   •   Finances: ASA needs to make adjustments to ensure financial stability
   •   Cost of meetings undermining budget efforts
   •   Fiscal responsibility
   •   Large annual deficits reducing future flexibility
   •   Meeting costs
   •   Money management

Membership Decline

   •   Declining membership
   •   Losing membership
   •   Losing too many more members
   •   Aging of the membership
   •   Retention of early career members
   •   Retirements of older members creating a gap
   •   Not enough students
   •   Membership loss




                                                 43
Engagement and Relevance

   •   Lack of engagement
   •   Losing relevance
   •   National and global tensions impacting engagement
   •   Aversion to change
   •   Not being flexible in changing long-standing programs
   •   Critical attitudes from older members towards early and mid-career people

Diversity and Inclusion

   •   Lack of diverse representation
   •   Retention of diverse members

Journal and Publication Pressures

   •   Pressures to change to open-access journals
   •   Competing journals
   •   Conversion of JASA to open access impacting revenue

Modernization and Technological Adaptation

   •   Modernization challenges
   •   Older members' resistance to new technologies
   •   Potential rapid changes in society and science not being addressed

External Factors

   •   National and global tensions
   •   Politicalization of science
   •   Declining college enrollments leading to fewer scientists joining the field




                                                   44
Key Issues & Challenges
Introduction:

This exercise is designed to identify key issues that ASA may/will have to deal with as it gets ready to
forge and execute its new strategic plan. Thinking slightly more “proximal” (close to home) vs. “distal”
(further out and away), what do we need to understand in order to be successful?

Key Terms:

External issues: issues that arise from outside sources, such as industry consolidation, public
policy issues, reimbursement/insurance issues, labor issues, specific NGO activity, and
competition.

Internal issues: issues within the organization itself, such as issues with structure, governance,
leadership, staff, volunteers, and membership.

Historical issues: lingering problems that need attention, such as legacy projects that need review,
un-addressed conflicts, reputational damage, etc.

Instructions:

The exercise is broken into three separate categories: External, Internal and Historical. In
preparation for your upcoming Strategic Think Tank, review the data below to support your thinking
and list all issues you can think of in each category. We will discuss in small and large groups.



                                           EXTERNAL ISSUES

                 External Issues:                                       External Issues:
1.                                                    6.

2.                                                    7.

3.                                                    8.

4.                                                    9.

5.                                                    10.




                                                     45
                          INTERNAL ISSUES

     Internal Issues:                         Internal Issues:
1.                                     6.

2.                                     7.

3.                                     8.

4.                                     9.

5.                                     10.




                          HISTORICAL ISSUES

     Historical Issues:                       Historical Issues:
1.                                     6.

2.                                     7.

3.                                     8.

4.                                     9.

5.                                     10.




                                  46
Inner-Stakeholder Data (External):

What do you believe are ASA's current blind spots (if any)?

 Key Themes from Survey Responses

   1. Membership Decrease:
          o Understanding the reasons behind the decreasing membership.
   2. Transparency and Influence:
          o Need for increased transparency about policies.
          o Undue influence of certain members on the funding of specific special programs.
   3. Income and Journal Threats:
          o Threats to journal revenues, which are crucial for the organization's income.
   4. New Technical Areas:
          o The necessity to focus on and adapt to new technical areas.
   5. Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion (EDI):
          o Further efforts required in promoting equity, diversity, and inclusion.
          o The need for broader buy-in from the membership, not just the leadership.
   6. Publication Speed:
          o The ongoing issue of slow publication processes.
   7. Conference Frequency:
          o Re-evaluating the necessity of holding two conferences a year.

   ASA's current blind spots include understanding membership decline, improving transparency,
   addressing undue influence, mitigating threats to journal income, adapting to new technical
   areas, promoting equity and inclusion more effectively, speeding up publication processes, and
   reconsidering the frequency of annual conferences.

Inner-Stakeholder Data (Internal):
What are the greatest opportunities for ASA's governing bodies to improve their
value to the organization?

Communication and Engagement

   •   Continue regular meetings away from in-person events
   •   Use modern communication channels
   •   Communicate more with full membership on policy considerations
   •   Always look to improve communication with members
   •   Get better at communicating what they are doing and why
   •   Dream of new ways to do meetings




                                                 47
Membership Growth and Retention

   •   Growing the membership
   •   Providing greater value to its members
   •   Making its members feel heard
   •   Find more ways to use students to get their input and guide them into ASA activities of
       interest
   •   Better connection between elected and professional ASA staff

Diversity and Inclusion

   •   Pay closer attention to diversity
   •   Ensure that awards are not given primarily to white males

Organizational Structure and Governance

   •   Some activities are obsolete, but change is difficult
   •   The one-year term of the ASA president is too short for accomplishing much; consider
       increasing the term to two years
   •   Similarly, the Executive Council members serve as administrative council chairs for only a
       single year, which is not enough time to organize any efforts

Knowledge Retention and Succession Planning

   •   Find more ways to retain knowledge as terms rotate

Financial Management

   •   Keep meeting costs under control
   •   Balancing yearly budgets to ensure and enhance the ability to fulfill ASA's mission
   •   Keep finding ways to cut costs of the society

Educational Outreach and Future Roles

   •   The role ASA can play in the future of acoustics education is untapped
   •   The new Education TC and Outreach and Education Committee could provide new impetus to
       engage students and non-members

Event Accessibility

   •   Only a fraction of the membership attends ASA meetings; periodic virtual meetings could be
       more broadly accessible and engaging




                                                  48
Publication Efficiency

   •   Keep decreasing the time to publication for JASA articles
   •   Re-work Acoustics Today to transmit news in a timely fashion with fewer issues per year

These themes highlight the key opportunities for ASA's governing bodies to enhance their value to
the organization, focusing on communication, membership growth, diversity, organizational
structure, financial management, educational outreach, event accessibility, and publication
efficiency.

What are the greatest opportunities for internal leadership/staff improvement?

Communication and Transparency

   •   Greater transparency
   •   Increase communication with full ASA membership about policies
   •   Increase communication with full ASA membership about new initiatives and strategic
       decisions
   •   Communication can always be improved
   •   Better communication to governance and ASA members

Knowledge Transfer and Succession Planning

   •   Important to ensure that key institutional knowledge is transferred when employees
       transition
   •   Ensure a succession planning strategy is in place

Oversight and Accountability

   •   Better oversight of committee operations and recommendations
   •   Oversight is needed for meeting expenses. The meeting organizer should prepare reports for
       the Executive Council, Finance Committee, and/or the Meetings Committee about the
       expenses and explicitly explain why costs that exceeded the budget were unavoidable and/or
       need to be more accurately reflected in the budget for the next meeting.

Fiscal Management

   •   Fiscal matters still need attention to detail
   •   Help find ways to cut costs in the society
   •   A healthy budget to invest in strategy

Innovation and Strategic Investment

   •   Tapping into non-academic education and training opportunities




                                                       49
These themes highlight the key opportunities for internal leadership and staff improvement within
ASA, focusing on enhancing communication, ensuring knowledge transfer, improving oversight and
accountability, managing finances effectively, and exploring innovative strategic investments.

Inner-Stakeholder Data (Historical):

Historically, what mistakes/failures should ASA learn from but has not?

Adaptation to New Ideas:

   •   Slow adaptation to new ideas and reluctance to leave behind old ones.

Fiscal Responsibility:

   •   Challenges with budget matching available funds and strategic usage of funds.
   •   Not spending money wisely despite having fiscal resources.

Bias and Inclusivity:

   •   Bias in awarding silver/gold medals predominantly to white males.
   •   The existence of an "old boys club" mentality in certain technical committees.

Conference Management:

   •   The necessity and cost-effectiveness of holding two conferences per year.
   •   High spending on conferences, particularly joint conferences in expensive locations.

Complacency and Reputation:

   •   Complacency in the past, now changed, but still requiring active outreach.

Communication and Outreach:

   •   Need for better communication of budget and financial strategies to members.
   •   Assumption that people will attend ASA based solely on its reputation without active
       engagement efforts.

International Meetings:

   •   Specific issues related to international meetings.




                                                   50
Historically, what assumptions (old ways of thinking) has ASA made that it needs to
challenge?

Necessity of Two Conferences:

   •   Questioning the necessity of holding two conferences per year, which can be costly and
       inconvenient for members with exams.

Old Boys Club Mentality:

   •   Challenging the "old boys club" mentality, particularly in the awarding of honors and medals.

Financial Assumptions:

   •   Assumption that ASA has enough money to say yes to everything without needing to pursue
       sponsors actively.
   •   Belief that income from journals is sufficient without considering broader financial threats.

Adaptation to Change:

   •   Slow adoption of new viewpoints, technologies, and ways of doing things.
   •   Need to challenge the assumption that ASA's excellent reputation alone will attract
       members.

Broader Engagement:

   •   Focus on publishing research primarily to promote educators instead of reaching a wider
       audience.
   •   Including acoustics in a broader range of materials and engaging more diverse audiences.

ASA should learn from its slow adaptation to new ideas, fiscal management challenges, bias in
awards, and the high cost of conferences. It needs to challenge assumptions about the necessity of
two conferences, the old boys club mentality, financial complacency, and slow adoption of change.
Emphasizing broader engagement and communication can help ASA evolve and better serve its
members




                                                  51
Key Issues & Challenges Evaluation
Instructions:

We will conduct the Key (Strategic) Issues & Impact together in small groups and as a large group.

   1. Will this issue have a strategic impact on ASA? In other words, will the issues impact our strategy?
   2. If so…
           a. What type of issue is it (Internal, External, Historical)
           b. How will it impact ASA? What would be the impact?
           c. How relevant is this or should this issue be to ASA? Use 1-5 scale, with 1 being not that
                relevant and 5 being extremely relevant.
           d. How great of an impact will it have? To what degree will it impact us? Use 1-5 scale,
                with 1 being minimal impact and 5 being significant impact.




                                                         52
                  I, E, H   YES          Relevance   Impact
ISSUE/CHALLENGE                   WHY?
                                           (1-5)      (1-5)


1.


2.


3.


4.


5.


6.


7.


8.


9.


10.




                                  53
                  I, E, H   YES          Relevance   Impact
ISSUE/CHALLENGE                   WHY?
                                           (1-5)      (1-5)


11.


12.


13.


14.


15.


16.


17.


18.


19.


20.




                                  54
Inner-Stakeholder Interview/Survey Themes
What are the biggest strategic issues/challenges/dynamics facing the industry/field
today? Think broadly about different themes (Socio-Demographic, Technology,
Environmental, Economic, Political, Industry trends, etc.).

Demographic and Membership Challenges

   •   Enhancing programs to meet the changing needs and interests of students
   •   Improving a sense of belonging for all members, especially those underrepresented in the
       Society
   •   Demographics: reductions in the student-age population
   •   Membership decline
   •   Decreasing personal interaction of members
   •   Aging membership
   •   Expanding inclusion to younger and more diverse members
   •   Declining membership
   •   Recruiting new talent to the field
   •   Retaining students in the field
   •   Need to diversify membership
   •   Competition from other professional organizations

Financial and Economic Pressures

   •   Funding
   •   Lack of sufficient funding, especially for science education
   •   Increasing costs of meetings
   •   Financial pressures due to changes in publications and inflation
   •   Diversifying revenue
   •   Getting our fiscal house in order

Technological Advancements and Integration

   •   Addressing the growth of student interest in computer science, data science, biology, AI
   •   The data revolution: acousticians need to be at the forefront of changes in data acquisition,
       storage, analysis, interpretation, and dissemination
   •   Incorporating AI and machine learning




                                               55
Public Engagement and Visibility

   •   Visibility/connection to important societal issues
   •   Relevance: enhancing awareness of the value acousticians bring to societal/environmental
       problems
   •   Public engagement
   •   Misinformation and mistrust of science amongst the general public
   •   It is difficult to explain to non-acousticians the impact of acoustics on their lives
   •   Need for better outreach and public engagement

Diversity and Inclusion

   •   Improving a sense of belonging for underrepresented members
   •   Inclusion: broad participation across diverse groups
   •   Opposition to equity, diversity, and inclusion initiatives in some regions
   •   Diversity: lack of representation in science

Environmental and Societal Impacts

   •   Environmental: anthropogenic impacts on the planet
   •   Political: mistrust of science by the general public
   •   Economic: undervaluation of science by the government
   •   Funding for environmental/ecological research compared to industry and defense

Academic and Industry Integration

   •   Maintaining status as academic leaders in the field
   •   Competing conferences and societies
   •   Maintaining and rebuilding a sense of community
   •   Focus on academia versus industry usage
   •   Balancing a wide range of expanding specialties in acoustics

Education and Fundamental Science

   •   Lack of access to good education and resources for under-represented communities
   •   Education: fewer people learning science fundamentals and critical thinking in grade school
   •   Need to explain the importance of acoustics in educational contexts

Organizational and Meeting Costs

   •   High cost of attending meetings
   •   Meetings running at financial losses
   •   Maintaining outstanding journals and publications



                                                56
Anti-Science Sentiments

   •   Rise of non-scientific thought, anti-environmentalism, conspiracy theories
   •   Politicization of science and opposition to evidence-based science

These themes summarize the key strategic issues, challenges, and dynamics facing the acoustics
field today, addressing a wide range of socio-demographic, technological, environmental, economic,
political, and industry trends.



Member/Non-Member Themes




                                              57
Creative Thinking Dots




                         58
Initiative Prioritization
Pre-Think Tank Worksheet

Introduction:

This exercise is designed to identify potential strategic initiatives over the next 3 years.

Key Terms:

Strategic Initiative: is a comprehensive plan or series of actions intended to achieve a significant or
overarching goal within an organization. It is designed to close the gap between the current status
and desired future state by leveraging specific strategic advantages or by addressing particular
challenges. Strategic initiatives often span multiple years and require substantial resources.

Instructions:

While we encourage you to review the survey data and build a list of potential strategic initiatives, we will
engage in this exercise as a large group and rank/vote strategic initiative priorities.


  •
  •
  •
  •
  •
  •
  •
  •
  •
  •
  •
  •

  •
•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•
Inner-Stakeholder Data:

Most Important and Valuable Strategic Initiatives for ASA (Next 1-3 Years)

Membership Growth and Retention:

   •   Growing and maintaining membership.
   •   Addressing membership growth.
   •   Maintaining and regrowing membership, which has been in slow decline.

Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI):

   •   Programs to support a more diverse representation and create a welcoming, inclusive
       society.
   •   Expansion of diversity research training initiatives.
   •   Ensuring equity, diversity, and inclusion underlies all programs and activities.

Financial Stability:

   •   Continuing efforts to balance the budget, particularly over-budget expenditure at national
       meetings.
   •   Tightening the fiscal ship and gaining more sources of income.
   •   Providing programs, particularly meetings, in a cost-effective manner and seeking new
       revenues for a balanced annual budget.

Innovation and Change:

   •   Addressing innovation and change.
   •   Ensuring ASA stays at the forefront of rapidly-evolving acoustics sub-disciplines.

Education and Outreach:

   •   Providing more access to acoustics education and opportunities.
   •   Expansion of community outreach.
   •   Increasing public outreach opportunities and science communication efforts.
   •   Communication with the public about ASA's missions and how the ASA can help them.

Support for Students and Early Career Acousticians:

   •   Expansion of student and postdoc fellowship awards.
   •   Providing students and early career acousticians with more resources, training, and
       opportunities relevant to them.
Collaboration and Networking:

   •   Broadening the network of acoustics for the next major breakthrough.
   •   Connecting academics and practitioners.
   •   Providing more opportunities, such as virtual round tables, for mid-career individuals to
       connect with others and the ASA.

Industry Engagement:

   •   Connecting with industry and practitioners.
   •   Increasing activities related to acoustics in industry.

To optimize its value, relevance, and positioning over the next 1-3 years, ASA should focus on
strategic initiatives centered around membership growth and retention, diversity, equity, and
inclusion, financial stability, innovation, education and outreach, support for students and early
career acousticians, collaboration and networking, and industry engagement. These initiatives aim
to ensure the organization's sustainability, inclusivity, and leadership in the field of acoustics.

Member/Non-Member Survey Themes:
What changes would you recommend to ASA to improve in any areas that you
rated lower?

Meetings

   •   Members suggested reducing the frequency and cost of meetings, improving the quality
       and diversity of presentations, offering more virtual options, and enhancing networking
       opportunities. Some mentioned the need for better geographical distribution of meetings
       and more focused, shorter sessions.

Publications

   •   Suggestions include increasing the impact factor of JASA, improving the review process,
       offering more open access options, and providing better support for authors. Members
       also mentioned the need for more practical and applied articles, as well as better
       organization and accessibility of online content.

Networking/Mentorship

   •   Members want more formal mentorship programs, better virtual connectivity options, and
       increased peer-to-peer interaction for graduate students. There is also a desire for more
       inclusive and accessible volunteer opportunities.

Content/Relevance/Segmentation

   •   There is a need for more focus on specific areas of interest, practical applications, and
       interdisciplinary content. Members suggested creating focus groups and providing more
       targeted information and research relevant to their fields.

Membership

   •   Members recommended simplifying the membership process, offering more support for
       early career researchers, and providing better outreach and engagement opportunities.
       There is also a call for reducing membership fees and improving the overall value of
       membership.

Culture

   •   Comments indicate a need for a more inclusive and welcoming culture, with less emphasis
       on social engineering and more support for diverse members. Some members feel that
       ASA is too academic-focused and needs to better support practitioners and industry
       professionals.
Volunteering

   •   Suggestions include providing clearer information about volunteer opportunities, ensuring
       that volunteer labor is adequately recognized and rewarded, and improving the efficiency
       of committee operations.

Regional/Chapters

   •   Members want more regional activities and better support for local chapters. There is a
       call for increased funding and organizational support for regional events and initiatives.

Awards

   •   Members suggested making the award and fellowship review process more transparent
       and providing better support for applicants. There is also a call for more recognition of
       achievements by women and minority members.

Information

   •   Suggestions include improving the organization and dissemination of information,
       providing more targeted and relevant content, and ensuring better access to publications
       and research.

Advocacy/Outreach

   •   Members want ASA to be more active in public education and advocacy, particularly
       regarding the health effects of noise and the importance of acoustics. There is a desire for
       more outreach to underrepresented communities and younger generations.

Standards

   •   Members recommended making standards more accessible and increasing engagement
       with industry. There is also a call for more funding and support for standards
       development.

Diversity

   •   Members want ASA to commit to supporting scholars from underserved populations and
       to improve diversity and inclusion within the organization. There is a need for better
       communication and support for diverse members, and for ASA to take a more active role
       in promoting diversity in the field of acoustics.

Website

   •   Members suggested improving the usability and accessibility of the ASA website, making it
        easier to find and access information, and ensuring that digital content is easily editable
        and searchable.
Social Media

   •    Suggestions include improving the quality and reach of social media posts, providing more
        engaging and relevant content, and better utilizing social media for outreach and
        communication.

Young Professionals/Students

   •    Members want more support for early career professionals, including mentoring
        opportunities, funding for attendance at meetings, and resources for career development.
        There is also a call for more engagement and outreach to younger members and students.

Cost

   •    Members suggested reducing the cost of membership, meetings, and publications to make
        ASA more accessible and inclusive. There is a call for more funding opportunities and
        financial support for members, particularly early career researchers and students.

Funding/Cost

   •    Members want increased funding for travel, fellowships, and training opportunities. There
        is also a call for more financial support for underrepresented students and early career
        professionals.

International

   •    Members suggested increasing opportunities for international members to participate in
        ASA activities, providing more support for scientists from low and middle-income
        countries, and improving the geographical distribution of meetings.

Other

   •    Various other suggestions include improving cross-disciplinary involvement, increasing
        ASA's relevance in certain fields, and ensuring better preparation for the future of the
        organization. Members also mentioned the need for better integration of industry and
        practical applications into ASA activities.

Former Member Comments

Former members cited high costs, lack of engagement, and perceived lack of value as reasons for
not renewing their membership. Some mentioned that they found other organizations more
beneficial for their professional needs. There is also a call for better communication and outreach
to former members to understand their reasons for leaving and to potentially bring them back to
ASA.
ASA Core Purpose Review
The purpose of the Society is to generate, disseminate, and promote the
knowledge and practical applications of acoustics.

Instructions:

Please review ASA’s Core Purpose language and then offer any thoughts, ideas, or refinements that
you think should be taken into consideration. We will discuss briefly and collect suggestions for
future iterations. You can also send your suggestions to: bruce@attentionalleadership.com.


                                  Suggested Refinements/Updates
Notes:
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
Notes:
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
                        Appendix A

ASA 2024 Strategic Planning Summary Slides & Comments
Strategic Planning
   Survey Findings
      Whorton Research
           May 11, 2024
                       Research Methods & Outcomes
§ We conducted a survey among current members and select former and never-member
  professionals for ASA from April 3 to April 26.
  § The universe consisted of 5,111 active members, 1,164 former members, and 812
     never-members.
§ A total of 2,157 individuals answered the survey, including 1,886 members, 141 former
  members, and 130 never-members.
  § Excluding 210 undeliverable records and 146 who opted out of participation, the
     overall response rate was 31.6%.
  § The response rate was 37.2% among members, 13.4% among former members, and
     16.6% among never-members.
                       Actual Membership Type & Status

Current ASA Member                                               87%


Former ASA Member           10%
                                                  Associate
 Never been an ASA
                       4%                           21%
           member

                                          Full
Actual membership status: 89% current,   member        Student
6% former, and 6% non-members.            42%            24%
                                                    Not
                                             Fellow sure
                                              4% 9%
                                          Geographic Region
                     United States                                            64%
                                                                        54%
                             Europe                    15%
                                                         18%
                               Asia              11%
                                                        18%
                 Canada or Mexico           6%
                                           4%
                                         2%
          Australia or New Zealand                  Current
                                         3%
                                                    Non-members
South/Central America or Caribbean      1%
                                          3%
                 Mideast/Near East     1%
                                       1%
                              Africa   0%
                                       0%          U.S. Census Area
                  Northeast     Midwest     South      West
       Current           24%                 18%                  27%   31%

Non-members            19%                 22%                 27%      33%
                Best Describes Current Employment Status
           FT employee      PT     Self-employed     Retired   Postdoc     Student   Other
 Current                                64%                              3% 7%       14%       2% 8% 1%

   Non-
                                         66%                               4% 5%     9%       6%     6% 2%
members


           Hold Other National/Global Acoustic Memberships
    Members                                   58%

Non-members                       39%


                      Regard as Primary Professional Affiliation
                ASA      Other association     No preference
      Current                    40%                               39%                         20%


 Non-members     13%                                 59%                                     28%
 Involvement in Publications & Communications, Past Five Years
                     Regularly read JASA                                              67%
                                                                               57%
 Regularly read Acoustics Today magazine                                             65%
                                                             30%
   Regularly read Physics Today magazine                                 42%
                                                     17%
      Regularly read JASA Express Letters                          36%
                                                           26%
Published in JASA or JASA Express Letters                          35%
                                                                  34%
      Regularly read ASA announcements                           32%
                                                        21%
              Follow ASA on social media              18%
                                                     18%
Regularly read Proceedings of Meetings on             18%
                                Acoustics         13%
                Read archival publications         14%      Current
                                                10%         Non-members
   Accessed Membership Directory Online           13%
                                             5%
                                    None     5%
                                                9%
                       Involvement in Meetings, Past Five Years
                                                                                              59%
                Attended in-person ASA Meeting(s)
                                                                                            56%
                                                                                      45%
 Presented at ASA Meeting(s) or published in POMA
                                                                                38%
                                                                          27%
     Served as a member of a Technical Committee
                                                          4%
                                                                       23%
                    Attended a virtual ASA Meeting
                                                                      22%
                                                                    18%
     Organized a special session at ASA Meeting(s)
                                                      4%
                                                               9%     Current
Served as a member of an Administrative Committee                     Non-members
                                                     0%
    Involvement in Volunteering & Other Activities, Past Five Years
                   Cast a vote for ASA elected offices                                               31%
                                                                3%
Encouraged peers, colleagues, or students to become                                                  31%
             a member or become more active in ASA                             10%
 Directly contacted ASA staff with a question via email                                        22%
                                              or phone           5%
Served as an ASA associate journal editor or reviewer                                          22%
                                                                          8%
       Participated in acoustics outreach or education                          12%
                                              activities         5%
  Participate in a Regional Chapter or Student Chapter                         10%
                                                                     6%
Applied for or received funding from ASA Fellowships,                      10%
                Scholarships, Grants, or Travel Awards                8%
               Participated in ASA standards activities                 9%
                                                            3%
Participated in ASA mentoring (as a mentor or mentee)                      9%
                                                                3%
   Served ASA as a leader (Board member, officer, or                  7%
                                  Committee chair)         1%
                     Received an ASA Award or Prize                  7%
                                                            3%                   Current
                                                  Other     3%                   Non-members
                                                            3%
           Level of Involvement in ASA Compared to your Ideal
  Considerably less involved than I want       Somewhat less involved   About as involved       More involved
 Current      12%                     34%                                      53%                              1%

   Non-
                    21%                        29%                               50%                            0%
members

              Likely to Renew or (re)Join ASA, Next Five Years
             Extremely likely    Very likely     Somewhat likely    Somewhat unlikely       Not at all likely
 Current                              56%                                     31%                      10%      2%

   Non-
               14%              18%                         36%                         21%               10%
members
             How you Prefer to be More Involved (if less than ideal)
                                Attending more meetings                                              70%
                                                                                                      71%
   Submitting and publishing more often in ASA Journals                                        54%
                                                                                             50%
                      Reading more ASA journal content                              40%
                                                                                  36%
                    Serving in more roles on committees                        29%
                                                                            22%
      Supporting ASA acoustics outreach and education                         25%
                                                                                 30%
     Engaging in and/or supporting more regional events                       24%
                                                                              25%
                 Reading more Acoustics Today content                         24%
                                                                            21%
  Engaging with/mentoring students/early career entrants                    22%
                                                                        15%
       Delivering expertise: workshops/training/speaking                    22%
                                                                            22%
                      Becoming more active in standards                  16%
                                                                       13%
                               Volunteering in other ways              13%
                                                                         16%
Consuming new types of content and/or delivery methods               10%
                                                                    8%         Current
             Contributing a special skill in service of ASA         8%         Non-members
                                                                   6%
                             Becoming a member of ASA         0%
                                                                                               55%
         Factors that Inhibit you from Being More Involved in ASA
           I lack sufficient time or have schedule conflicts                                          68%
                                                                                     41%
I lack funding/financial support for travel to ASA meetings                        36%
                                                                                     41%
              It is difficult to be engaged from my country              19%
                                                                      13%
      The cost is greater than the benefit I would receive             15%
                                                                                  33%
        I am unaware of the benefits and services of ASA             12%
                                                                     13%
       ASA is not as relevant to my career as it once was          10%
                                                                      14%
I lack experience to be comfortable as a volunteer in ASA          9%
                                                                5%
                Other associations meet my needs better            9%
                                                                  8%
   My employer does not support my involvement in ASA             8%
                                                                      15%
                           I do not feel welcomed by ASA         6%
                                                                 7%
  Hold membership in years I attend/present at Meetings        3%
                                                                            24%         Current
                                                                 7%                     Non-members
                                              Other factors      7%
              What you Value Most about your Membership in ASA
   Accessing research that I would otherwise be unaware of                                         62%
                                                                                          49%
  Accessing journal content that I would not have access to                                 53%
                                                  otherwise                        40%
    Increasing my professional development and education                                   53%
                                                                                            54%
                        Expanding my professional network                               49%
                                                                                         50%
The opportunity to connect, support and serve my peers and                            45%
                                                colleagues                        38%
                Meeting and discussing with peers regularly                        40%
                                                                                  39%
                       Developing meaningful relationships                        39%
                                                                            30%
      Seeing my own discipline through different theoretical                       39%
                                                      lenses                     35%
   Meeting with colleagues to explore problems requiring a                    31%
                                 multi-disciplinary approach                  31%
 The opportunity to explore cross-discipline research and/or                 30%
                                          grant opportunities                  32%
   Gaining recognition for my professional accomplishments                  28%
                                                                        23%
                                                                                     Current
                    Participating in leadership opportunities     14%                Non-members
                                                                11%
                      Importance of Key Services of ASA that you Used
       Extremely important      Very important     Somewhat important          Somewhat unimportant           Not important at all
               ASA Membership overall       6%        24%                                 51%                    11% 5%
                                   JASA                  45%                                     40%                14%
Fellowships/Schol./Travel Awards/Grants              35%                              35%                10% 5%
                Publishing opportunities                42%                                 35%                 16% 2%
                          ASA Meetings               34%                                  45%                    17%    4%
                         ASA Standards                                       83%                                    17%
              Presentation opportunities            30%                              42%                      20%     4% 2%
                    Archival publications            33%                               42%                   13% 4%
                   JASA Express Letters            26%                              47%                      16%     8%
                ASA Awards and Prizes                      44%                          22%                22%
  ASA Acoustics outreach and education       15%                         46%                                 38%
           Membership Directory Online                   40%                        20%                     40%
           Student Chapter membership              27%                  18%          9%     9%
   Proceedings of Meetings on Acoustics            29%                        29%                       31%               11%
             Acoustics Today magazine        13%                 30%                              46%                     8%
                    ASA announcements        13%                       43%                               37%               6%
          Regional Chapter membership                 36%                       18%                        45%
                Mentoring engagements              27%                       27%            9%          18%          9%
      Volunteer/leadership opportunities     16%            19%                       38%                   13%       3%
               Physics Today magazine        17%                   31%                            38%                  10%
                       ASA social media      17%                   31%                            38%                    14%
                              Satisfaction with ASA Key Services Used
              Extremely satisfied     Very satisfied   Somewhat satisfied     Somewhat dissatisfied      Very dissatisfied
               ASA Membership overall       11%             32%                         40%                  6% 3%
                                   JASA            28%                             52%                        17% 1%
Fellowships/Schol./Travel Awards/Grants         20%               25%                25%           5%
                Publishing opportunities        21%                          49%                       20%       2%
                          ASA Meetings           22%                        46%                        25%         4%
                         ASA Standards                     50%                                     50%
              Presentation opportunities        19%                      51%                            23%        2%
                    Archival publications      17%                      52%                            22%
                   JASA Express Letters           24%                      48%                          17%     2% 2%
                ASA Awards and Prizes                33%                 22%           11%           22%
  ASA Acoustics outreach and education         17%            25%                            50%                    8%
           Membership Directory Online              30%                    30%                     30%
           Student Chapter membership               30%            10% 10% 10%
   Proceedings of Meetings on Acoustics              33%                      33%                    24%           6%
             Acoustics Today magazine           19%                      48%                          27%          3%
                    ASA announcements           19%                  39%                           35%             4%
          Regional Chapter membership           20%                    40%                            40%
                Mentoring engagements              27%              18%          18%          9%
      Volunteer/leadership opportunities         22%             19%            25%           6%
               Physics Today magazine            22%                       46%                         24%         2%
                       ASA social media         20%                   39%                           34%             7%
        Importance Ratings of Key ASA Services, by Membership Status
               ASA Membership overall                              3.86
                                                      3.16
                                   JASA                                           4.43
                                                                               4.31
Fellowships/Schol./Travel Awards/Grants                                          4.37
                                                                            4.18
                Publishing opportunities                                        4.35
                                                                            4.18
                          ASA Meetings                                       4.22
                                                                          4.08
                         ASA Standards                                     4.13
                                                                                         4.67
              Presentation opportunities                                   4.15
                                                                          3.96
                    Archival publications                                     4.13
                                                                             4.09
                   JASA Express Letters                                     4.03
                                                                         3.93
                ASA Awards and Prizes                                    3.94
                                                                                 4.25
  ASA Acoustics outreach and education                                    3.96
                                                                     3.77
           Membership Directory Online                                  3.92
                                                                           4.00
           Student Chapter membership                                3.76
                                                                           4.00
   Proceedings of Meetings on Acoustics                            3.73
                                                                    3.74
             Acoustics Today magazine                          3.55
                                                              3.50
                    ASA announcements                         3.50
                                                                 3.64
          Regional Chapter membership                       3.44
                                                                        3.91
                Mentoring engagements                       3.42
                                                              3.50
      Volunteer/leadership opportunities                  3.34             Current
                                                          3.36
                                                       3.21                Non-members
               Physics Today magazine                           3.58
                       ASA social media              3.14
                                                              3.50
        Satisfaction Ratings of Key ASA Services, by Membership Status
               ASA Membership overall                                    3.83
                                                           3.45
                                   JASA                                           4.16
                                                                                4.06
Fellowships/Schol./Travel Awards/Grants                                 3.78
                                                                       3.73
                Publishing opportunities                                       4.00
                                                                             3.92
                          ASA Meetings                                    3.83
                                                                           3.85
                         ASA Standards                                 3.72
                                                                                          4.50
              Presentation opportunities                                         4.14
                                                                            3.92
                    Archival publications                                      4.03
                                                                             3.95
                   JASA Express Letters                                         4.07
                                                                              3.98
                ASA Awards and Prizes                                            4.13
                                                            3.50
  ASA Acoustics outreach and education                        3.57
                                                            3.50
           Membership Directory Online                                     3.88
                                                                              4.00
           Student Chapter membership                             3.63
                                                                              4.00
   Proceedings of Meetings on Acoustics                                    3.90
                                                                             3.97
             Acoustics Today magazine                                           4.07
                                                                          3.86
                    ASA announcements                                    3.83
                                                                       3.75
          Regional Chapter membership                    3.32                         Current
                                                                         3.80
                                                                3.52                  Non-members
                Mentoring engagements                                  3.88
      Volunteer/leadership opportunities                           3.69
                                                                     3.78
               Physics Today magazine                                   3.89
                                                                         3.92
                       ASA social media                         3.56
                                                                   3.71
        Gaps: Overall Importance vs. Satisfaction with Key ASA Services
                                                                           3.79
               ASA Membership overall                                      3.80
                                   JASA                                                         4.42
                                                                                      4.15
Fellowships/Schol./Travel Awards/Grants                                                      4.35
                                                                          3.77
                Publishing opportunities                                                     4.33
                                                                                  3.99
                          ASA Meetings                                                   4.20
                                                                           3.83
                         ASA Standards                                                4.15
                                                                          3.75
              Presentation opportunities                                              4.13
                                                                                      4.11
                    Archival publications                                             4.12
                                                                                   4.03
                   JASA Express Letters                                            4.02
                                                                                    4.06
                ASA Awards and Prizes                                            3.96
                                                                                     4.08
  ASA Acoustics outreach and education                                           3.94
                                                                   3.57
           Membership Directory Online                                        3.92
                                                                             3.89
           Student Chapter membership                                     3.78
                                                                       3.66
   Proceedings of Meetings on Acoustics                                  3.73
                                                                              3.91
             Acoustics Today magazine                               3.54
                                                                                  4.05
                    ASA announcements                              3.52
                                                                           3.82
          Regional Chapter membership                             3.47
                                                               3.36              Importance
                Mentoring engagements                            3.43            Satisfaction
                                                                    3.54
      Volunteer/leadership opportunities                      3.34
                                                                        3.70
               Physics Today magazine                      3.23
                                                                             3.89
                       ASA social media                   3.18
                                                                     3.58
      Level of Agreement with Statements: ASA’s Value and Performance
                          Strongly Agree         Somewhat Agree          Neither     Disagree Somewhat          Strongly Disagree
     ASA does a good job keeping up with changes in the field          26%                       46%                     14% 2%2%
                ASA is welcoming to early career professionals         26%                  37%                15%        5% 2%
     ASA delivers ample oppty. to network at bi-annual meeting        22%                34%                  20%        4% 2%
               ASA is an inclusive and welcoming organization          25%                  37%                16%        5% 2%
  ASA is quick to respond to issues of importance to acoustics        22%                35%                  21%        2% 1%
                  ASA delivers good value for the cost of dues    14%              34%                   29%              8% 7%
    ASA leverages multi-disc. community as a distinction/asset        24%                  35%                 23%          7% 1%
    ASA provides sufficient range of services to meet my needs    16%                36%                      31%            6% 4%
                        ASA communicates effectively with me      15%                37%                      31%           6% 3%
ASA has a diverse membership and meeting/program attendees              29%                    35%                 16%     6% 4%
           ASA membership has helped me succeed at my job        12%           30%                     34%               7% 9%
        ASA is transparent—I understand what it does and why      17%                37%                      27%          5% 2%
             ASA gives me oppty. to leverage knowledge/skills     15%                38%                     24%         3% 3%
                  JASA has an appropriately high impact factor    18%                 38%                      28%           8% 4%
              ASA serves all of its member segments equitably     14%              32%                 24%         4% 2%
I understand how to access all the benefits of ASA membership    7%            40%                     21%           21%           8%
   ASA strikes a good balance between academia and industry       15%              32%                  25%          9% 4%
           Average Agreement with Statements, by Membership Status
     ASA does a good job keeping up with changes in the field                          4.10
                                                                                     4.03
               ASA is welcoming to early career professionals                          4.09
                                                                                   3.93
    ASA delivers ample oppty. to network at bi-annual meeting                        4.04
                                                                                  3.86
              ASA is an inclusive and welcoming organization                         4.02
                                                                                   3.93
  ASA is quick to respond to issues of importance to acoustics                     3.93
                                                                                   3.92
                  ASA delivers good value for the cost of dues                      3.98
                                                                        3.43
    ASA leverages multi-disc. community as a distinction/asset                     3.92
                                                                                 3.82
   ASA provides sufficient range of services to meet my needs                      3.93
                                                                          3.57
                       ASA communicates effectively with me                       3.88
                                                                           3.61
ASA has diverse membership and meeting/program attendees                          3.83
                                                                                   3.88
           ASA membership has helped me succeed at my job                          3.88
                                                                   3.32
       ASA is transparent—I understand what it does and why                    3.77
                                                                             3.71
             ASA gives me oppty. to leverage knowledge/skills                 3.74
                                                                              3.72
                 JASA has an appropriately high impact factor                 3.73
                                                                           3.59
             ASA serves all of its member segments equitably                3.66
                                                                             3.69
I understand how to access all the benefits of ASA membership               3.67
                                                                 3.18                 Current
   ASA strikes a good balance between academia and industry              3.56         Non-members
                                                                         3.53
         Important Challenges Facing Acoustics in Next Few Years, Members
        Low understanding among policymakers of value of acoustics field                                                    55%
    Low understanding of value of acoustics to media and general public                                                   53%
       Insufficient sources of sustainable funding for research in acoustics                                            51%
                               Difficulty attracting students to study acoustics                                      49%
Getting public to see implication of acoustics on real-life issues/problems                                          48%
                           Increasing age of active professionals in acoustics                                    44%
          Insufficient undergraduate degree programs/majors in acoustics                                    39%
                        Difficulty attracting early career scientists to the field                          39%
            More new ideas/discoveries occur at intersection of disciplines                                39%
Translating basic research into useable intelligence/practical applications                              36%
                                   Insufficient graduate programs in acoustics                         33%
         Seeing acoustics through preventative lens vs. after the fact issue                         30%
            Non-acoustical professionals doing more acoustical consulting                            30%
 Clarifying mutual benefit/reciprocity with academic/industry stakeholders                           30%
      Scientists leaving acoustics to other scientific fields leveraging skills                     29%
                  Lack of demographic diversity and inclusivity in acoustics                      27%
   Challenge leveraging policy to integrate acoustics into regulatory stds                       26%
               Lack of collaborative partnerships with associations/industry                    25%
         Impact of AI/automation reducing demand for expert acousticians                        25%
              Difficulty finding acousticians to meet the demand of industry                  22%
                        Students encountering difficulty being placed in jobs               21%
    There are infrequent new ideas and discoveries recently in acoustics                    21%
 Accelerating # of specialties drawing attention away from core discipline                18%
                                                                           Other     4%
  Important Challenges Facing Acoustics in Next Few Years, Non-Members
        Low understanding among policymakers of value of acoustics field                                                            51%
       Insufficient sources of sustainable funding for research in acoustics                                                  45%
          Low understanding of value of acoustics to media/general public                                                   44%
                               Difficulty attracting students to study acoustics                                          41%
            More new ideas/discoveries occur at intersection of disciplines                                         37%
Getting public to see implication of acoustics on real-life issues/problems                                       35%
Translating basic research into useable intelligence/practical applications                                     33%
          Insufficient undergraduate degree programs/majors in acoustics                                        33%
         Impact of AI/automation reducing demand for expert acousticians                                       32%
                                   Insufficient graduate programs in acoustics                               30%
                        Difficulty attracting early career scientists to the field                          29%
                           Increasing age of active professionals in acoustics                             29%
      Scientists leaving acoustics to other scientific fields leveraging skills                         25%
                        Students encountering difficulty being placed in jobs                          24%
    There are infrequent new ideas and discoveries recently in acoustics                             22%
              Difficulty finding acousticians to meet the demand of industry                         22%
         Seeing acoustics through preventative lens vs. after the fact issue                        21%
            Non-acoustical professionals doing more acoustical consulting                           21%
                  Lack of demographic diversity and inclusivity in acoustics                       20%
               Lack of collaborative partnerships with associations/industry                      19%
 Clarifying mutual benefit/reciprocity with academic/industry stakeholders                       19%
   Challenge leveraging policy to integrate acoustics into regulatory stds                      18%
 Accelerating # of specialties drawing attention away from core discipline                12%
                                                                           Other     6%
               Top 3 Issues Facing Acoustics Over the Next Few Years
     Insufficient sources of sustainable funding for research in acoustics                       15%                        5%   10%
       Seeing acoustics through preventative lens vs. after the fact issue                 9%               5%             5%
      Low understanding among policymakers of value of acoustics field           3%             7%                   9%
Translating basic research into useable intelligence/practical applications          4%               8%              4%
        Low understanding of value of acoustics to media/general public          2%             7%               7%
       Impact of AI/automation reducing demand for expert acousticians               4%         4%              6%
                               Insufficient graduate programs in acoustics        4%             6%             5%
          More new ideas/discoveries occur at intersection of disciplines             5%         5%             4%
             Lack of collaborative partnerships with associations/industry           4%     2%         6%
                       Increasing age of active professionals in acoustics        4%        3%             5%
 Accelerating # of specialties drawing attention away from core discipline                 10%             1%2%
     Scientists leaving acoustics to other scientific fields leveraging skills   2%        3%         6%
Getting public to see implication of acoustics on real-life issues/problems      3%        3%         5%
          Non-acoustical professionals doing more acoustical consulting 1%             5%             5%
    There are infrequent new ideas and discoveries recently in acoustics              5%         4%        2%
                            Difficulty attracting students to study acoustics    3%         4%        3%
   Challenge leveraging policy to integrate acoustics into regulatory stds        4%        3%        3%
            Difficulty finding acousticians to meet the demand of industry            5%        2% 3%
Clarifying mutual benefit/reciprocity with academic/industry stakeholders             6%         3% 1%
                     Students encountering difficulty being placed in jobs       2%        5%        3%
                Lack of demographic diversity and inclusivity in acoustics 1% 4%                2%
         Insufficient undergraduate degree programs/majors in acoustics          2% 3%          2%
                     Difficulty attracting early career scientists to the field 1%     5%        2%
   Important Challenges for ASA Over Next Several Years, Members
Getting more people to see everyday relevance of acoustics in their lives                                             52%
         Attracting students from a broader array of acoustical specialties                                     36%
             Maintaining the robust multi-disciplinary nature of the Society                                    36%
               Retaining more early career professionals as ASA members                                       34%
                     Increasing focus on new, emerging fields in acoustics                                   34%
  Delivering world-class live meetings: up-to-date topics/delivery options                                  32%
   Increasing employers’ support for employees' activity in ASA activities                            28%
More HS/college workshops/schools/bootcamps showcase career oppty.                                   27%
    Increasing demographic diversity of membership to reflect profession                            26%
   Increasing industry/commercial participation in membership/meetings                             25%
                    Retaining the need and interest in acoustical standards                        25%
        Changing business models for publishing (including open access)                           24%
   Fostering even greater multi-disciplinary thinking and problem solving                        23%
 Projecting a more modern, up-to-date image to members and the public                           23%
     Identifying and capturing new acoustic disciplines in a timely manner                     22%
            Forming more strategic partnerships to leverage our resources                    20%
                   Maintaining value with an increasingly diverse audience                   20%
Preventing small groups from exerting influence over larger parts of ASA                    19%
        Competing more effectively with other specialty scientific journals               17%
  Engaging more members through leadership/volunteer service in ASA                      17%
  Competing more effectively with specialty societies to attract members                 16%
        Optimizing learning/dev. methods/technologies for use/distribution             15%
                 Competing more effectively with other specialty meetings              14%
       Optimizing current programming/sunsetting less relevant programs              13%
  Optimal allocation of resources based on discipline relevance/segment         6%
                                                               Other issues    5%
   Important Challenges for ASA Over Next Several Years, Non-Members
Getting more people to see everyday relevance of acoustics in their lives                                           39%
               Retaining more early career professionals as ASA members                                           38%
         Attracting students from a broader array of acoustical specialties                                      37%
                     Increasing focus on new, emerging fields in acoustics                                     35%
   Increasing employers’ support for employees' activity in ASA activities                                     35%
More HS/college workshops/schools/bootcamps showcase career oppty.                                       30%
             Maintaining the robust multi-disciplinary nature of the Society                            29%
   Increasing industry/commercial participation in membership/meetings                                27%
                    Retaining the need and interest in acoustical standards                         25%
   Fostering even greater multi-disciplinary thinking and problem solving                           25%
            Forming more strategic partnerships to leverage our resources                          24%
        Changing business models for publishing (including open access)                           23%
        Optimizing learning/dev. methods/technologies for use/distribution                        23%
  Delivering world-class live meetings: up-to-date topics/delivery options                      21%
 Projecting a more modern, up-to-date image to members and the public                         19%
  Competing more effectively with specialty societies to attract members                      19%
     Identifying and capturing new acoustic disciplines in a timely manner                   18%
        Competing more effectively with other specialty scientific journals                  18%
                   Maintaining value with an increasingly diverse audience                  17%
    Increasing demographic diversity of membership to reflect profession                   16%
Preventing small groups from exerting influence over larger parts of ASA                 14%
                 Competing more effectively with other specialty meetings                14%
       Optimizing current programming/sunsetting less relevant programs                13%
  Engaging more members through leadership/volunteer service in ASA                  11%
  Optimal allocation of resources based on discipline relevance/segment        7%
                                                               Other issues     8%
                                         Greatest Challenges Facing ASA
Getting more people to see everyday relevance of acoustics in their lives                        23%           9%   7%
   Increasing employers’ support for employees' activity in ASA activities            7%        7%        6%
         Attracting students from a broader array of acoustical specialties          6%        7%        6%
            Forming more strategic partnerships to leverage our resources            7%       6%        6%
              Retaining more early career professionals as ASA members              6%      6%        5%
  Delivering world-class live meetings: up-to-date topics/delivery options         5%      5%       5%
Preventing small groups from exerting influence over larger parts of ASA          4%     5%       5%
More HS/college workshops/schools/bootcamps showcase career oppty.                 5%     5%      5%
                   Retaining the need and interest in acoustical standards        4%     5%      5%
       Optimizing learning/dev. methods/technologies for use/distribution         4%     5%      4%
    Increasing demographic diversity of membership to reflect profession          4% 4%        4%
  Engaging more members through leadership/volunteer service in ASA              3% 4%        4%
   Increasing industry/commercial participation in membership/meetings           3% 4% 4%
  Optimal allocation of resources based on discipline relevance/segment         2% 3% 4%
                     Increasing focus on new, emerging fields in acoustics      2% 3% 4%
       Optimizing current programming/sunsetting less relevant programs         2% 3% 4%
                   Maintaining value with an increasingly diverse audience      2% 3% 4%
             Maintaining the robust multi-disciplinary nature of the Society    2% 3% 3%
  Competing more effectively with specialty societies to attract members       2% 2% 3%
        Competing more effectively with other specialty scientific journals    2% 2% 3%
                 Competing more effectively with other specialty meetings      2%2% 3%
        Changing business models for publishing (including open access)        1%2% 2%
   Fostering even greater multi-disciplinary thinking and problem solving        1% 2%             #1
 Projecting a more modern, up-to-date image to members and the public            1% 1%             #2
     Identifying and capturing new acoustic disciplines in a timely manner                       #3
                                                               Other issues
Would Support Potential Changes at ASA as Improvements to Association
     More public outreach showcasing real/practical value of acoustics                                             44%
                                                                                                                     47%
                       Advocacy for more funding of acoustics research                                           42%
                                                                                                    30%
Promote value of acoustics to engineers/architects/relevant professions                                         40%
                                                                                                         32%
                       More publicity for new papers published in JASA                                  32%
                                                                                                       31%
More partnerships with other associations/universities/industry partners                               31%
                                                                                                          33%
   Providing post conference access to unpublished, presented papers                                  31%
                                                                                                     30%
      More programming focused on early and mid-career acousticians                                28%
                                                                                                26%
                                              Faster publication process                         26%
                                                                                               25%
 Identify ways acoustics is seen to offer preventative/strategic solutions                      26%
                                                                                           22%
  Stronger collaborative relationships with other scientific organizations                      25%
                                                                                                   28%
 Increase opportunity to interact/collaborate with industry professionals                    23%
                                                                                          21%
 Increase focus translating research findings into practical applications                    23%
                                                                                                   28%
                          More ASA or Chapter local/regional meetings                      21%
                                                                                              24%
          Enhancing social/networking opportunities between meetings                   18%
                                                                                            23%
 More intimate programming such as mentoring early-career members                      18%
                                                                                       18%
           An emerging leaders’ program for early-career professionals                17%      Current
                                                                                  13%
        Increased opportunity to discuss presented papers at meetings               15%        Non-members
                                                                             7%
      Likely to Recommend a Peer to Join ASA: Net Promoter Score



                                                                                    Detractor
                                                                                      17%

                                                                Promoter
31%
                  Current                                         47%
                  Non-members                                                           Passive
                        22% 22%
                                                                                         36%
                  20%
      19%
            17%
                                  14% 14%

                                                 9%        8%
                                            6%        6%
                                                                     4%
                                                                               2%                    2%
                                                                1%        1%        1% 1% 0% 1% 1%
                                 Professional History, Overall
                                                                                               53.6
                                  Age                                                          54.0
                                                                       26.2
 Years worked in the field of acoustics                               25.0
                                                 5.9
 Years plan to work before retirement           5.0
                                                               20.8
       Years held membership in ASA
                                                                               Mean
Years held membership in ASA before                    8.6                     Median
                           dropping             5.0

                         Mean History, by Membership Status
                                                                                               54.4
                                  Age                                                   47.4
                                                                        27.2
 Years worked in the field of acoustics
                                                             18.9
                                                 6.0
 Years plan to work before retirement           4.9
                                                               20.8
       Years held membership in ASA
                                                             Current
Years held membership in ASA before       0.0                Non-members
                           dropping                    8.6
                                           Years in the Profession
                  20/30s      40s        50s    60s     70+
  Age range,
                          22%                    18%              19%          19%                 21%
     current
  Age range,
                                    39%                            22%        15%           13%          11%
non-members

                                  Years with Current Employer
                  0-5     6-10         11-20    21-30    >30
Years in field,
                  10%            11%            18%               21%                      40%
      current
Years in field,
                        16%                    23%                     27%           15%            18%
non-members

                    Years of Membership, Current Members
                  0-2      3-5      6-10       11-20     21-30   >30
Years of ASA
                  11%             13%            14%             19%         18%                  25%
 membership
                                           Degrees Held
               Non-MD doctorate       MD     Master's        Bachelors     Other
     Current                 67%                        1%           39%                      44%               5%


Non-members                    65%                           1%          37%                      34%           4%


                                      Main Work Area
               Coll/Univ   Industry        Consulting Firm        Self-Employed      Government         Nonprofit

     Current                       52%                                   14%          16%          7%       8% 3%


Non-members                           55%                                      17%          10%     5%      8% 2%
          Primary and Secondary Interests in Acoustics, Members
                 Speech Communication                              14%                                7%
                   Architectural Acoustics                       12%                       2%
                                    Noise                    11%                            6%
                   Underwater Acoustics                     10%                                 8%
                    Biomedical Acoustics                    10%                       4%
                       Physical Acoustics               9%                        5%
Psychological and Physiological Acoustics              7%                                       15%
                   Engineering Acoustics           5%                            9%
           Signal Processing in Acoustics          5%                                 13%
        Structural Acoustics and Vibration        4%                   5%
                        Musical Acoustics         4%                        8%
                     Animal Bioacoustics          4%               7%
                Acoustical Oceanography           4%        2%
                 Computational Acoustics     1%             6%
                   Education in Acoustics         3%
     Primary and Secondary Interests in Acoustics, Non-members
                   Architectural Acoustics                              17%                           6%
                 Speech Communication                            12%                          6%
                                    Noise                   10%                                 12%
Psychological and Physiological Acoustics                   9%                                11%
                   Underwater Acoustics                     9%                           8%
                       Physical Acoustics               8%                          8%
                   Engineering Acoustics               7%                      8%
                    Biomedical Acoustics           6%              2%
           Signal Processing in Acoustics          5%                         10%
                     Animal Bioacoustics          5%              3%
        Structural Acoustics and Vibration        4%               6%
                        Musical Acoustics         4%               6%
                Acoustical Oceanography           4%               5%
                 Computational Acoustics     1%         5%
                   Education in Acoustics         3%
ASA 2024 Strategic Planning Survey Comments
In what ways have you been involved in ASA over the past five years?
• Acoustics Education．
• Active member of Spanish Speaking Acousticians Chapter
• Ad hoc committee
• Ad Hoc Committee on Practitioners and Industry
• Advise Thesis students in Acoustics
• Applied for Robert Bradford Newman Student Medal and David T. Blackstock Mentorship Award
• ASA Regional Chapter officer
• ASA School
• At meetings, lunch with students
• Attended a Women in Acoustics Luncheon
• Attending to ASA event (like the one that is coming in Ottawa per example)
• Chair or Vice-Chair of ASA standards committee S12, ASACOS, USTAG to ISO TC43/SC1
• Committee International Liaison
• Contact with ASA Foundation
• Coordinated activities between ASA and INCE-USA
• Counting student council as ASA leader
• Donated money to ASA causes
• Downloaded standard document
• Dutifully represent acoustic engineering profession
• educate small group of people in each area of our market to raise their awareness of noise and vibration
• Encouraged attention to acoustics in city policy decisions
• Facilities Chairman Orlando, FL National Meeting; Nominate candidates for ASA Fellows; etc.
• Founder of The Association for Acoustics and Vibration in Indonesia (AAVI)
• Helped set up and organize a new chapter in San Francisco Bay Area
• Historian at Archives and history committee
• Hosted an intern through SUREIA
• IEC and AES standards work
• In regular contact with Nancy Blair de Leon in her role as secretariat of ISO TC 43/SC 3 on behalf of ANSI/ASA
• Judge for student poster competitions at ASA meetings
• Judge for student posters
• Judging student paper competitions
• letter writer for award
• Lobby my organization to provide award funding and donations.
• local meetings only
• Manuscript Reviewer for JASA Express Letters
• Met student members for lunch many times
• Non-ASA peer review and standards
• Occasionally access american standards
• Occasionally read JASA papers
• One or more ASA committees (Awards, books, etc.)
• Organized an educational session at a public library.
• Organized two meetings
• Participated on Sound Panels ASA America and ASA Berlin as a member of Midwest Acoustic, and did sound
    recordings with ECO Design SAIC students
• Patent reviewer for JASA
• President of Chicago chapter
• Received awards from Madras India Chapter of ASA
•   Reviewing papers submitted to JASA. Lecturer, Physical Acoustics Summer School, 2024, 2022, ...
•   search references in JASA
•   Served on university’s Acoustics Research Group council
•   Some regional meetings
•   Student challenge problem
•   Student Council Representative for the P&P TC and I am involved with CIRDI
•   Student council, helped organize and co-chair 4 sessions, 1 session in May.
•   Students Meet Members for Lunch program.
•   SUREIA (2)
•   Technical Program Organizer (4)
•   Treasurer for university’s local chapter of ASA and attend regularly.
•   Upcoming ASA school
•   Vocal member of the Spanish Acousticians Chapter

How would you prefer to be more involved in ASA?
• Assist with making ASA more widely known in the general public.
• Attend one ASA meeting with proper representation from ASA; I was denied visas for a reason not befitting (not
   showing enough funds to attend whereas I proved I had enough funds to attend).
• Attending online meetings ... which I do not do today
• Be an Associate Editor (2)
• Chair or co-chair sessions (2)
• Committee to organize the ASA centennial
• Communication with other members/people in similar work
• Continuing work with MSAE team
• Diversity measures
• Engaging with ASA technical department
• JASA on CD not online
• JTCA
• Leading/participating in efforts to make ASA accessible to people with disabilities, neurodiversity, or chronic illness
• Like to become full member but limited by current procedure
• Mentoring
• More participation in professional development or workshops (as a student)
• Online attendance at meetings
• Peer reviewing of ASA journals; review more manuscripts
• Present employment does not encourage any involvement
• Promote collaboration with other societies (IEEE UFFC, AIUM)
• Take student workshops
• TC, special sessions
• Working in a role that was focused on acoustics
• Would like to incorporate more acoustic concepts into my curriculum

What factors tend to inhibit you from being more involved in ASA?
• Culture of exclusivity (10) Applied for ASA lunch, and mentoring and never heard back. When I tried to get involved
  with the local conference, it was readily apparent that the "established core group" did not want "outsiders" is how I
  felt, communication was poor and our university was not included in student outreach/planning. Disgust with a
  "leader" describing committee I served on as "pale, male, and stale". Prejudice has no place... yet it became
  commonplace, shame. I sent my interest to participate more in the TCs but didn't get follow up from ASA. I used to
  feel welcome but no longer do. Don't know anyone in my work group who is actively involved in ASA, I wouldn't
  know how to do it. Not sure how to get more involved. Senior scientists often dominated the dialogue in technical
  committee meetings when I was an early-stage investigator. Tried to reach out to volunteer so time for student
  mentorship, but was never contacted. Very difficult to get involved in some technical committees, you can attend
    their meetings, add your name to a volunteer list and never hear anything. The only group that has openly
    welcomed me and engaged me is computational acoustics TC.
•   Awareness (8) Hard to know how to engage better, what pathways, all remote looking from EU, I am sure nowadays
    there would be options. lack of understanding about ASA involvement in industrial-commercial and NDT applications
    spaces. Don't know how to become more involved. Not very familiar with the overall committee structure and roles
    of ASA (despite being a 25 year+ member). Not clear how to volunteer. The pathway to involvement is not clear
    (e.g., how to volunteer in women in acoustics). Need more information on how to get involved. Unsure about how
    to get involved.
•   New (6) Hope to be more involved in ASA as a newcomer. I just joined. I've only recently become a member and my
    work has started overlapping more closely with ASA. Still getting up to speed with a new acoustic field at my job. Still
    new to the society - currently slowly increasing activity.
•   Money (4) Do not always have funds to attend the ASA Meetings. Costs of meetings are very high. Meeting costs are
    outrageously high. Having 1 meeting a year with lower registration costs would increase my participation.
•   Journal (3) Publication hampered long ago by what I feel was an unfair editorial process that hopefully has been
    corrected. JASA impact factor is too low, at neuroscience departments JASA is counted as low impact. Journal has
    consistently rejected articles of new ideas in favor of established views; reviewers were not encouraging of a
    pathway to publication of good science instead of rejecting articles based on disagreement of the premises.

    Other Factors
•   Active in multiple societies; my employer supports me but I'm hitting a limit
•   Am Chairman and would like staff to participate more
•   As a midcareer professional, pursuing a PhD in acoustics part time, my primary work field is not acoustics
•   As Prof Emeritus, I lack students
•   ASA has become too socio-political
•   ASA is run like a legacy organization. It'd be great if activities are made more accessible and convenient.
•   Attend other conferences where potential clients attend, making time stretched thin. Society of College and
    University Planners, League of American Orchestras, and International Assoc of Venue Managers conferences.
•   Brand new member, so I haven't had the chance to get involved.
•   Disconnect between disseminating basic research results, retaining/protecting proprietary/national interests
•   Distance to meetings
•   Diversity was previously not a factor considered in 2005-2015, not sure if that changed).
•   Do not seem to be any ASA activities in Southern California
•   English correction of paper will be necessary.
•   I feel incompetent in the field.
•   I'd read more if there was a good way to focus on underwater acoustics. Perhaps parse out the different
    subdisciplines (e.g. structural acoustics)?
•   Inconsistent funding to enable planning and commitment.
•   It is difficult to find open positions in many of the ASA committees
•   Lack of clarity regarding this information on the website
•   Lack of online meetings or advertisement of online meetings
•   Lack of sociophonetics in JASA
•   My own research activities are none since my retirement
•   Need to reduce to about 3 days to cover my interests, 5 days too much
•   Not fully aligned with current grant work
•   Not updating my membership to full due to unavailability of endorsers
•   Notifications of conf acceptance were too late for funding
•   Opportunities for getting involved are not always clear
•   Pandemic reduced travel & involvement
•   Relatively new member, room for growth in my involvement
•   Resources/time, etc. among ASA, INCE, NCAC, and other professional organizations
•   Reviewing procedure in my field is not fair.
•   Serving as a Director of institute
•   Some TCs does seem to put an effort to be more inclusive.
•   Still waiting on full membership
•   TCs more academia focused, do not have as much interaction with industry. Interspeech, IEEE UFFC fill gap better.
•   To an extent I feel welcome, but there is difficulty I feel incorporating my research into ASA's objectives.
•   Travel and in person meeting constraints related to Covid
•   Under employed & in non-ASA industry; income & time barriers
•   Visa application to attend conferences (Internoise, ASA or Noise-Con) are always rejected after 2018

What factors tend to inhibit you from being a member of ASA today?
• ASA's failure to collaborate with embassies in issuing or granting visas for legitimate reasons is another concern. This
  failure demonstrated that ASA is merely biased in favor of developing countries.
• Can't pay the subscription
• Cost is not negligible.
• Could not afford dues after pandemic. By 2024, I feel more comfortable in fulfilling my duties.
• Currently applied
• More interested in wave physics in general and not only acoustics, and I feel that ASA doesn't have enough links
  with colleagues working in RF, electromagnetism, quantum, ...
• Was Board Member of ICA and contributed and participated in joint meetings of ASA and ICA
• I joined, paid dues, then nothing--absolutely nothing--occurred, in terms of any outreach or connection or
  opportunity to make those connections myself, in any way shape or form, until it was time to pay dues again.
  Baffling and significant disappointment, to say the least.
• Lead non-profit NEXT.cc STEAM by Design that introduces youth to wonder of the built and natural worlds. We have
  Listening, Sound, Soundscapes, Sound Mapping Journeys that elementary, middle, HS, college students use.
• Not allowed to use state funds for memberships, but I can use travel funds to pay NM registration.
• It is hard to travel to meetings and I do not know any members of ASA to refer me.
• Lacking time and means for additional research of ASA topics
• Really expensive membership and benefits for Latin America are not really useful and a big benefit
• The whole ‘find someone to sponsor you’ thing is off-putting

What do you value most about your membership in ASA? (other)
• A highly functional professional environment with well-run regular meetings
• Access to journals, supporting the research world
• Advancing Diversity in Acoustics
• ASA is internationally recognized as THE learned society in the discipline. Belonging and publishing in JASA as well
  and gaining access to, collaborative engagement with, the world's best researchers and practitioners were key
  drivers for me joining and being actively involved in the programs and activities of ASA. Joining 33 years ago was the
  best decision I made as an early-career scientist.
• Connections with past
• Developing and supporting standards
• Easier access to journal content
• Gaining recognition for my employer’s professional accomplishments; development of Piezo-MEMs transduction
• General awareness related to acoustics and vibration
• Helping raise otherwise overlooked, practical questions in the field through presentations.
• How ASA relates to my UK institute IOA
• I look forward to doing more of these at the next meeting
• I'm a pretty new member, I haven't used my membership enough
• Improve ASA focus on workers in the field and not some much on politics
• Including ASA membership on my professional resume
• Just grant opportunities and conference member rate
• keeping in touch with field
• Learning about acoustics.
•   learning more about acoustics
•   meet customers
•   meetings
•   Membership indicates a level of acoustics experience that is valuable as a consultant
•   My support for the aims of the ASA - I could get journal access through my institution
•   No occurrence with any since becoming member
•   Participating in developing ANSI and ISO standards
•   Participation in ANSI and as delegate to ISO
•   Providing opportunities for students
•   Publishing articles
•   Quality control of JASA
•   Reduced registration rates at conferences
•   Required by some project contracts
•   Researching a book that includes quite old volumes
•   Reviewing JASA to stay mildly abreast of my interests
•   scientific quality of JASA and ASA meetings
•   Staying in touch (2) with peers
•   Supporting improved or new standards/codes.
•   Trying to belong to, and serve, the community, while avoiding travel.
•   Want to support ASA because I think you do an important job
•   Watching the arc of the society
•   Wondering why I am a member any more

    Former Member comments
•   Discounted conference prices
•   free standards
•   Didn’t find it that valuable- or worth the cost
•   Had my own business for 20+ years and didn't see opportunities that would have benefited us. ASA is self-serving
    and don't need that for my personal fulfillment or professional marketing. Don't think ASA or INCE is helping society
    deal with community noise in a manner that would yield a change in cultural values or benefit public versus
    consultants making money.
•   lacking time and devices for contribution to ASA research topics
•   with free access to journal from university's library, did not get announcements of new issues of the journal or
    upcoming ASA conferences.
•   We could get a few free ANSI standards every year with membership but now a very little discount.

What changes would you recommend to ASA to improve in any areas that you rated lower?
Meetings
• ASA is a very international society but meetings are mostly in the US. Given that there are mostly two meetings a
   year it is a pity that they concentrate mostly on north America. It would be nice to have the meetings spread more
   around the world.
• Add frequent “contests” where winning members have their transportation and lodging paid for to attend a
   meeting.
• I find ASA presentations a joke and do not consider them valuable when evaluating job candidates.
• I lament going to an ASA meeting and recognizing that those that are attending are not the people really doing
   exciting work in my field, and I'm not sure how to remedy the situation. I do have colleagues that I value and respect
   in ASA, but often when I go, I have the unfortunate feeling I'm wasting my time. I think my colleagues that are not
   attending might come if they felt they would meet others that are likewise very active in the discipline.
• Society and work areas changing in a way that makes it more difficult for a lot of people to attend meetings and
   engage with ASA.
•   With twice-annual meetings. I feel extraordinary pressure to try to attend each of these meetings, and given that I
    also attend IEEE, APS, and discipline-specific meetings it just is not possible. I was organizing special sessions and
    such at ASA but stopped when attendance to them dwindled because we were having them so often that those of
    us working in my area could not possibly keep coming back.
•   ASA meetings are entirely too broad and too often to provide any means of focusing on interesting work or
    attracting leading researchers to present their work.
•   I am old enough to have gray hair, but when I attend ASA meetings, I feel young. Fact is that leading researchers in
    my field do not attend ASA, and I work in acoustics. ASA needs new perspectives and new people.
•   Virtual meetings lose much of the benefits of attending a research conference, particularly in networking
•   ASA Meetings are far too expensive to attend relative to other conferences and happen too frequently.
•   ASA meetings cost an extraordinarily high amount. To attend means I cannot attend 2-3 other meetings. The
    benefits are the meeting are not so large that they outweigh this tremendous cost. Also, ASA is not nearly as diverse
    as it ought to be and I have experienced micro- and macro aggressions from attendees and have experienced sexual
    harassment from older members of the society.
•   ASA Meetings have always been very biased to academic participants
•   ASA meetings have become extremely expensive. While I have tried to attend every meeting since joining the ASA in
    1992 as a student, the cost of registration, hotel, and travel have made it financially impossible to attend both
    meetings in recent years.
•   ASA meetings should be more often abroad (in Europe)
•   ASA meetings somewhat have less publicities than AES and some IEEE meetings. Not sure if it is possible to have a
    peer-reviewed submission track for ASA meetings.
•   ASA meetings, the registration fee is too expensive, even for students. I'd suggest to allow 2-3-day attendances too,
    and pay based on the number of days one attend.
•   Virtual meeting as planned for 2024 is completely meaningless! Conference is held to bring people together.
•   Number of social evenings could be increased. (Denver in May 2022 was a nice example with at least 2. Sydney was
    quite poor with just 1.
•   Cost of registration and conference attendance is prohibitive.
•   An ASA meeting without a printed program as in Sydney 2023 is meaningless (for me) either. Just scanning program
    on a screen is cheap for ASA but terrible for participants. I heard a lot of concerns in Sydney. Get some idea how to
    present a good survey of the conference program from the German Acoustical Society and their annual meeting.
•   Change meetings (4) to be annual instead of two times per year.
•   Charging full registration fee for invited talks is not good
•   Registration fees for ASA meetings continue to climb while the surrounding services decline. While hardly of
    scientific import, the buffet socials now consist of junk food, reduces attendance and opportunity to sit and
    converse with colleagues in an informal, relaxed environment.
•   Bi-annual meetings are too frequent and too expensive. Oftentimes people attend every other meeting, so some
    colleagues are on an off-cycle and never attend the same meetings.
•   Conduct only 1 meeting per year and minimize the number of meetings held abroad (the travel costs are too high)
•   Do not hold meetings on dates that require travel on Thanksgiving weekend. Do not hold meetings during
    Hanukkah.
•   It would be much better to have ONE IN-PERSON MEETING per year so that ASA can dedicate a larger budget
    towards social hours and networking events.
•   Fall 2024 meeting will be virtual as an experiment, but no one I've talked to is excited about the prospect so I don't
    see this as a solution long-term.
•   Conference papers when written should be made available to all
•   Additionally, cost cuts (fewer social hours, limited food, outrageously priced drinks, no coffee/snacks) discourage
    people from attending the networking events.
•   Consistent online ASA meeting availability.
•   Bringing together people of different disciplines is a unique advantage of the annual meeting. It was odd that the
    PNP and Speech Comm sections were attended by different groups of people. Sessions that combine multiple
    disciplines around a topic would bring together the groups and topics.
•   Less expensive venues for meetings would be very much appreciated, as many of us are not employed by private
    businesses.
•   Don't care for virtual meetings (2) and am unwilling to pay for them.
•   Seek lower cost opportunities for in person meetings. We have been talking about this for over a decade - meetings
    lose money but are most important part of ASA other than JASA. Seek cheaper but still accessible cities and venues.
    Step away from international conferences when possible.
•   2x/year meetings aren't necessary. One every 9 months rotating (so that we get off this weird train of having
    meetings during finals weeks in academia!) would be very welcome.
•   ASA meetings are too long, suggest shortening to 3 days.
•   I recommend that ASA Meetings be consolidated to once per year, on par with most professional societies.
•   I went to 2022 fall meeting, my first in twenty years. Extremely discouraged by degree to which meeting and
    proceedings were following a template from decades ago. Even with the interruption of the pandemic, massive tech
    changes, it seemed little institutionally had been learned about facilitating exchange of info in conference settings. It
    was really surprising how much things in Nashville that week seemed like Fort Lauderdale back when.
•   Decreasing number of meetings to once a year. Twice a year is difficult to find funding to support, as costs increase.
•   It is also difficult for those outside the society to get involved when general topics sessions are scheduled first/last
    M/F of the meeting after many people have already left.
•   Meeting registration fees and hotels are prohibitively expensive for me, exacerbated by the number of days
    required to attend. I would much prefer to have presentations in my area concentrated in 2-3 days. this is really the
    only reason I am not more active.
•   Meetings are becoming exceptionally expensive compared to the other professional/academic organizations'
    meetings I attend
•   Meetings are expensive
•   Meetings are expensive and time consuming -- my subgroup is small; I wish it met just once per year (every other
    meeting) so these would be higher quality and less overwhelming to try to attend.
•   meetings are too long.
•   meetings have become bloated to the point that multiple sessions organized by my TC run in parallel. Also, holding
    two meetings a year has become a financial burden on the organization.
•   Keep hosting two in-person social events per meeting, since networking is a big part of why I attend in-person ASA
    meetings. Much rather have one meeting a year with two socials than have two scaled back meetings a year.
•   Print copies of the meeting program are very helpful for navigating in-person meetings. The online planner apps
    have been slow and hard to quickly see what talks I want to see, and where they're being held.
•   proceedings are not really proceedings, just abstracts. When compared to IEEE Ultrasonics, the value of the
    published abstracts of JASA meetings is much less compared to IEEE.
•   publication of abstracts only is not satisfying. If there is no paper it might be good if (some) slides of presentations
    could be online, too.
•   Reality is for professionals in private practice, it is critical to avoid being away from clients for a full week. Making
    every effort to put content (sessions-socials-committees) that appeals to professional communities such as
    acoustical consulting in a 3-day window like NOISE CON and INTERNOISE is key to meeting the needs of this group.
    Avoid situation with 3 hours of useful content, a wasted afternoon, then not getting something significant again til
    the next day. I really think we need to revisit the structure and plenary. Why not have a plenary during the Tu/Th
    evening social? Something to mix it up rather than leave Wed too light and stretching things into Mon-Fri for other
    content. It’s hard to balance needs of working professionals with those in research and the broad nature of ASA.
•   Reconsider moving to one national/international meeting per year.
•   registration fee is more than I can afford. I would suggest that meetings be held on university campuses.
•   registration fee is really too expensive, especially the one-day registration fee!
•   Review quality of papers presented at ASA meetings.
•   Switch to a single ASA meeting per year. I don't know who are the people who can afford to go to 2 acoustic
    meetings each year (in terms of funding and time).
•   Two meetings a year is way too much. I would attend more meetings if there was one every year or even every
    second year where fewer disciplines were represented. It is not only that I would get to travel less, but also that
    more of my colleagues would be there, if it was only every 2 years, making it more fruitful.
•   Make sure that the ASA meeting proceedings do have articles and not only abstracts.
•   ASA in Chicago 2023 was very, very expensive to register, which allied to expensive hotels and flights from Europe
    made the whole thing uneconomic. I was there the full week, and many of the US delegates were only there a day or
    so. Please find a way to either make it cheaper -- is it really necessary to hold it an expensive city convention hotel --
    or to get locals to go there?
•   ASA meetings have gotten very theoretical and most of the papers do not apply to what I am working on
•   Consolidate conferences around disciplines with key times for cross-disciplinary work, require at least 500-word
    paper, and ensure a review is done before the presentations. Noise-Con has completely outdone ASA when it comes
    to the quality of presentations and improving the acoustical industry.
•   Don't think ASA should cut number of in-person meetings held in a year. They are very important to students getting
    into this career.
•   It spends 2 weeks a year doing 15-minute presentations with no papers to share the information for members
    outside of the room. ASA has felt like a waste of time and money over my 18 years in the industry, which really
    makes me sad.
•   Focus on in-person meetings in affordable locations.
•   General members/fellows have no inputs to the selection on ASA meetings’ location as well as the option of in
    person vs virtual meeting.
•   Have only 2 meetings per year
•   Have all talks in my area concentrated on 1-2 days, deciding on that day well in advance for making travel plans.
•   Hold meetings in less expensive travel locations, and not in the busy weeks between Thanksgiving and Christmas
    holidays. I always have to choose between ASA and AGU meeting also held in those weeks.
•   still wondering what on earth ASA does with meetings. Cut to 1 social at ASA Sydney, providing food that was
    practically inedible. We went from Chicago, to Sydney, to Ottawa, and then...virtual with a format that makes
    student participation difficult. So disappointed in the ASA with making it hard for faculty members to get students to
    meetings. For Ottawa, hotel and airfare was incredibly expensive (Delta doesn’t fly there). Am actively exploring
    other societies and options to do what is best for my students.
•   Most difficult to find sessions and connect with peers within environmental acoustics/terrestrial bioacousticians.
•   I haven't attended ASA for many years because conference seemed repetitive, same presenters, same paradigms,
    nothing innovative or new. It may have improved recently
•   I know that money is always a tricky thing to manage, but the registration fees are quite steep as well.
•   I love ASA meetings, but with tight budgets, having a virtual option really opens up potential for participation.
•   In-person meetings keep ASA close and two socials are extremely important to see so many persons and interact. I
    understand ASA is trying to find ways to cut costs. I hope you can keep the two socials and find a way to finance
    that. One idea is to add that as a fee or just book meeting room and up the bar prices so they venue still makes it
    available. Cut some costs of providing the breakfasts and lunches and other foods for various executive meetings.
    Explore off-site social venue for one of the meetings. We won’t have a vibrant society without social interactions.
•   More meeting outside USA
•   More meetings in Mexico and Canada
•   more on line meetings and seminars
•   More online meetings
•   My main concern is making the meeting accessible. As meeting prices increase it is becoming more and more
    difficult to attend meetings. I am also concerned that the cost this is excluding a large group of potential members,
    who would attend if it was more financially viable.
•   Meetings are too big and nothing outside my area is even remotely related to work so it's 5 days for just one
    afternoon of interesting things.
•   Needs at least one in-person ASA meeting per year located in the continental United States.
•   Too often to have 2 ASA meetings per year. Very few researchers have something new to present every 6 months.
•   Twice per year meetings: I can rarely justify going to two meetings per year; consequently, I cannot be deeply
    involved in committees or organizational work.
•   Would like more US West Coast (CA) meetings. Travel is to meetings tends to be very burdensome; I would like to
    attend more but often don't because of this.
•   My primary satisfaction is with the meeting schedule. Two meetings per year is too much and I feel the society
    should strongly consider hosting just one meeting per year.
•   Location of meetings has been a point of contention and executive council has not been transparent in decisions.
•   Scheduling locations of meetings has been poor lately and has discouraged attendance.
•   Lack of CEUs offered for ASHA through ASA. When I attend conference, one of my main concerns. ASA didn't offer
    any for me which meant I attended another conference to get them. Funding is often a problem with our university.
Virtual Meetings
• Hybrid technical sessions and TC meetings must have appropriate audio technology for in-person room to hear and
    communicate with virtual participants and for virtual participants to hear and communicate with the in-person room
• more hybrid events? lower fees?
• More information about virtual events
• More virtual meetings and content.
• More virtual meetings and virtual options to present at the annual meetings
• More webinars/virtual meetings
• No to online meetings
• Offer Zoom coverage for meeting to aid folks who cannot attend in person.
• Have option of hybrid participation (remote attendance) as well.
• Remote meetings are a complex and multifaceted topic. For early career people (such as myself), in person ASA
    meetings are the most important thing I do to advance my career. Online meetings disproportionately hurt early
    career because much of the networking done at an ASA meeting can only be accomplished in person and is vital to
    advancement. People later in a career already have a network of people that they know and online meetings are
    better suited to maintain existing relationships.
• Remove notion that virtual meetings are in any way an acceptable replacement for in-person. They don't compare. It
    was better than nothing during the pandemic... that's about where it stands - Better than nothing. (But not much.)
• trend towards fewer accessible in-person ASA meetings is a problem. The matched issue of registration cost at these
    meetings is a huge barrier to access for expanding the importance of the Society in our discipline.
Publica(ons
•   Too many published articles that appear to be to meet academic publishing goals for maintaining academic
    credential. Very few practical how-to articles.
•   Physics Today is difficult to browse online.
•   Special issues in JASA to be released frequently on 'Data-Driven Methods in Acoustics'
•   Acoustics Today: some of the articles seem patronizing while others assume that the reader is in expert in the area.
•   Nothing can be done about Physics Today--I know that. Occasionally there's something about acoustics.
•   We need a less bulky way of sending JASA to members--perhaps just mailing tables of contents so that we can look
    up articles online.
•   Extremely disappointed that ASA has decided to discontinue print and deliver JASA. I would be very happy to pay
    more for the print publication, rather than seeing it go away.
•   Additional archival publications?
•   Quality of editors' judgments have declined, with the quality of work published in JASA. That appears to stem largely
    from ill-informed reviewers. Watched process over four decades.
•   As a reviewer, I feel that sometimes manuscripts that do not pass the minimum requirements are sent for review.
    This is just a waste of time of the reviewers, and should be rejected by the editors.
•   Publication process (JASA, JASA-EL) is not particularly pleasant. Instructions for authors have many inconsistencies
    between online and pdf, online submission is rather horrendously opaque and really needs to be improved.
•   ASA should try to increase the impact factor of JASA by perhaps reducing the review time of submitted manuscripts.
•   Change Acoustics Today to resemble Physics Today for acoustics. Shorter format and shorter articles, more newsy. I
    very rarely read any of the long papers/articles in Acoustics Today
•   No need for print publications, digital only preferred.
•   Increase page limit for publishing in JASA, which inhibits my decision to submit my full-length articles since cost for
    pages over limit is too high. Prioritize publishing in open access venues, so eliminate or reduce author fees for open
    access publication.
•   Drop Physics Today. Even though I am a physicist, too much of it is useless egotistical garbage.
•   Eliminate hardcopy mailouts of Physics Today and Acoustics Today and any other letters or brochures or
    communication. ASA should become 100% online using electronic brochures and communication.
•   Estimate articles only by scientific contribution.
•   Last few years, the number of articles in environmental noise effects and music are limited.
•   Add option to opt-out of printed Acoustics Today and Physics Today publications as part of membership renewal.
•   Acoustics today has too many articles that do not make connection with today’s mainstream acoustical problems
    such as environmental noise
•   Better open access publication models that complies with research councils funding rules. We have no additional
    money to pay unsupported models, so we take work elsewhere.
•   ASA may need to focus on the journal and its meetings instead of many other activities.
•   access to some papers at JASA have been restricted in past years. I wish to access all the library without any
    restrictions.
•   Acoustics Today is well designed and sometimes has articles that interest me.
•   Experienced unfair treatment by reviewers of manuscripts submitted to JASA more than once. I wish the associate
    editors would have taken their job more seriously in these cases - I got the impression they were unwilling to
    thoroughly examine results not in line with previous results. In my experience, this is much better handled by Acta
    Acustica, which is why I now tend to prefer AA over JASA for publishing my (and that of my team members)
    research.
•   For Acoustics Today, I wish there were more articles of interest to me. I am interested in room acoustics and DSP.
•   For my subarea JASA is extremely highly regarded (perhaps it's THE top journal) but unfortunately the overall impact
    factor does not reflect it at all.
•   Still prefer paper publications and don't like social media as a place to learn of ASA news. The most improvements
    would occur by changing my personal schedule to allow more focus on ASA activities.
•   I think Acoustics Today would benefit from a critical review and very possibly a facelift. A lot of the material is of
    little interest to me, but that is largely because I am not particularly interested in architectural, musical, or aural
    acoustics...so my opinion should probably be disregarded.
•   Used journal more regularly and consider it to be vitally important for global acoustics. I see my membership as
    supporting the journal even if I don't currently use it.
•   I usually spend a fair bit of time skipping through structural acoustics and linguistics (etc.) en route to content that is
    more relevant to me. 'Acoustics' is a broad field, and I wonder if more could be done to sort/organize content. It is
    beneficial to have access to 'all' acoustics content but I'd prefer to have software do the sorting for me.
•   I wish I could opt out of getting Physics Today.
•   I wish the publishing opportunities where a litter easier to comply with.
•   I work on a computer most of the day; reading paper copy of JASA provided me with an important screen break.
    Decision to cease printing in 2025 was disappointing. I find I already read POMA less because it is digital.
•   I would appreciate the option to have only e-copies of the magazines delivered.
•   Make JASA more open source (make the financial barrier to make the publication open source significantly less)
•   I’d love to see page numbers included for the featured articles on the cover of JASA.
•   Impact factor of JASA is hard to justify in promotion applications relative to other hearing/neuroscience journals.
    Boost this. I understand this may not be possible given how diverse the topics included in JASA are.
•   Improve the quality of assistant reviewers and some reviewers (in room acoustics)
•   Improved scientific quality and impact of JASA publications
•   In 2024, many of us do not need printed copies of Acoustics Today and Physics Today delivered to our homes when
    it is accessible online. I would like to see my membership funds used in other ways than going to printers and
    wasted ink and paper.
•   In recent years JASA editors seem to be less experienced people. They are not aware of how to balance the
    importance of the standard of the Journal, readers, reviewers, and the authors. I have published seminal works in
    JASA in the past, however my recent experience is that the editors are too conservative and giving away to
    conservative reviewers by rejecting papers that challenge common belied/wisdom or disruptive research outcome.
    So, please take care in appointing editors who are one dimensional.
•   In terms of publication, I believe two reviewers for each manuscript is necessary and standard in other journals. I
    recently submitted to JASA-EL and had only one reviewer.
•   Increase the JASA page limits just a little more. 12 pages is really tight for some of the speech communication topics
    and there aren't many other venues that are receptive to longer acoustics papers.
•   increasing the journal impact factor
•   Invest more in the of publication and publishing processes. I notice a somewhat rushed proof-editing stage in JASA
    and JASA-EL (probably AIP's fault?), which negatively impact the "typographical quality" of published papers. Other
    journals have a more thorough and rigorous editorial process—I had 6 rounds of proof requested by publisher for an
    article in an APS journal. I struggled to get a second set of proofs in JASA, and the article was published with lots of
    typographical errors.
•   JASA EL manuscripts should be processed much faster. Acoustics Today is valuable, but tends to cover somewhat
    "old" topics and not so often new exciting developments in the field. AT cover graphics are not inviting.
•   JASA Express Letters experiences have been terrible on the editorial copy-editing side. It feels as though some of the
    most important aspects have been outsourced. Perhaps this has changed, but after the last experience with this
    publication have decided not to publish there again. The ASA meetings used to be a favorite of mine, but the timing
    during the academic semester and the cost of registration have prevented me from being able to attend in person
    for several years.
•   JASA express letters has become so selective that I’m not sure what the goal of the journal is anymore
•   JASA needs double blind peer reviews
•   JASA needs to become Full Open Access, at an affordable condition (cost)
•   JASA used to send out the table of contents by email. This provided a quick overview of the current issue
•   Miss serendipity of finding articles in print JASA. I know I can access it online, but rarely do that.
•   Most ASA members simply don't care about Physics Today. Physicist is a minority within the ASA.
•   No need for print editions of most publications for members at this point, except for libraries and educational
    institutions.
•   Page charge for > 12 pages in JASA should be removed (that regularly prevents me from submitting to JASA)
•   Physics Today and Acoustics Today be provided only in digital form.
•   Physics Today is not that important
•   Physics Today is so out of area for me. Could they include a broader range of material?
•   Physics Today seems very superficial and disappointing. It should alert me as to the latest and most exciting
    advances. It does not.
•   Print JASA. I know it's expensive and not likely. I just prefer print.
•   Publish electronically (not on paper)
•   Publishing opportunities with ASA are limited. While having separate review committees can be difficult, having
    additional publishing opportunities outside JASA or JASA Express could help introduce other people about ASA and
    increasing impact factor of the journal.
•   quality of some JASA papers is lower than before, and IF of JASA is not high enough to attract more manuscripts with
    very good new knowledge.
•   Quicker turnaround time for POMA submissions. The structure of the online directory is dated and could be
    improved for simpler and faster navigation.
•   Remove recent JASA bias against publishing Computational Ocean Acoustics articles. Back in the 1990's, there were
    tons of articles about modeling acoustics in the ocean.
•   Rigor of express letters needs to improve.
•   Some improvement in recent years, but my sense is that JASA is overconcerned with details upon initial
    submission...like whether the word 'we' occurs in the abstract...which creates unnecessary delays in the review
    process. Some other journals are now adopting a policy in which the initial submission does not have to be in a
    specific format (or must be in a format with very few specific requirements). If the paper is reviewed favorably, the
    authors then put the paper in the full format of the journal. I think this more flexible approach--or something like it--
    would be attractive to many would-be JASA authors.
•   Split JASA publication journal in A,B,C, ... as Physical Review, Physics letters. A few subjournals of JASA might have
    higher impact factors! the IF of JASA has really gone down that it is not taken seriously anymore in other disciplines.
•   Stop charge page fees beyond 12 pages
•   Streamlining processes more effectively. Procedures and protocols are somewhat cumbersome and bureaucratic.
•   Submitting articles to JASA still yields quite fiddly submission checks that are not always necessary, at least at the
    stage of 1st submission
•   There should be some method of publishing the presentations at ASA conferences (beyond just abstracts in
    proceedings) so other members can see the research even if they missed the session. Perhaps this means
    submission of a short article for presenters, and that these get published in a document/available on website? If this
    is already being done, please let me know!
•   Work on increased ease for submitting publications
•   Fees for "open access" publications are too high in my opinion. It feels like we are requiring professors to pay large
    sums of money just to get their work seen, which conflicts with the fact that publication is a job requirement. It's
    weird to have to pay to be able to work.
•   I encourage open access to journals to support knowledge and expansion of the field. This might be done by
    excluding the current calendar year from online access.
•   Magazines have too much commercials and most of the content is either too difficult to read or uninteresting.
•   Online access to journals through revolving door of third-party suppliers is simply impenetrable. I realized last fall
    when a colleague asked me about an article (and I advised them to get a membership). I went to access the article
    online to demonstrate the ease of operation, but your web interface/vendor had changed and I was unable to login.
    I was concerned maybe forgot to pay my dues but was unable to access my account. I was unable to rectify the
    situation and gain access after reaching out.

Networking/Mentorship
• If there are periodic online meet ups and discussions, I am unaware of these and might wish to participate. I wish I
   had fewer time constraints and could participate more fully!
• Increase graduate student peer to peer interaction that isn't dependent on attending ASA conference meeting social
   events. Difficult to outreach if there aren't already fostered connections, and can be intimidating after an entire day
   of attending sessions
• More interactive posts on all platforms
• Provide opportunities that welcome and connect members to volunteer opportunities rather than relying on
   personal networks to connect and fill vacancies or request service. Directly identify low bar ways in which members
   can become more involved without having to already know how to navigate the professional networks.
• Virtual connectivity options
• We should find a way to exchange more between people making active research.
• Run a mentorship program again, improve communication with Chapters and Chapter activities
• Would like to see more formal mentorship programs.

Content/Relevance/Segmentation
• Acoustics community is quite a bit wider than ASA itself and the society would benefit from outreach to experts that
   haven't been heavily involved or may have drifted away in their careers.
• ASA seems to work well for academics and acousticians in fields other than architectural acoustics. Most ASA
   members in the field of architectural acoustics are consultants and so the ASA, and the format of their meetings do
   not serve us well.
• Create FOCUS groups provisioned by domain of acoustics; Room/Venue, Test & Measurement, underwater, animal,
   environmental, industrial materials...and so on. it is important to have members more involved. Especially, from
   industry and commercial partners. I believe this can be achieved by not lumping everything together. It’s a bit
   overwhelming and time consuming to learn how to optimize involvement both individually (profession) or for your
   employer (commercial) to be honest.
• Focus or program more architectural projects and proposals relevant to my interests.
• Include more industry/applied acoustics, meaning not academic, government, or consulting. JASA used to be very
   useful to me, but now is just research that has no benefit for me at work.
• Increase number of papers focusing on practical applications
• invite more speakers from my discipline (central physiology)
• It would be nice to be able to select information and research in the field that you work in.
•   It's a bit scant on bioacoustics/ecoacoustics content. I don't have a lot of time in the schedule so ease of sign-ups for
    volunteering opportunities would be great. There's a Job Postings section, what about a volunteers wanted section?
•   It's great having access to the various publications and research, and to the general ASA community, although we're
    limited by location.
•   Membership is so broad that it would be good to have more opportunities to focus on specific areas.
•   More emphasis on Physical Acoustics and less emphasis on psychological and biological acoustics.
•   more material on speech and auditory physiology
•   More publications on non-auditory health effects of noise
•   more publications on the direct application of acoustic research in practice.
•   My field of acoustical oceanography is small.
•   Physiological acoustics
•   Pre-Speech development in infants -we know more about whale song, monkey calls and songbirds than about our
    own babies' sound development.
•   Provide summaries of articles and professional field relevance.
•   Psychoacoustics can broaden to include music education research, how we do acoustics in education, and what this
    means for meter education. Music could be utilized more in acoustics outreach and meter can be discussed
    visualizing low meter frequencies that in relation.
•   Students in acoustics outreach could be taught how to make a radio. Tuning forks should be standardized as in a
    chromatic collection for schools rather than a seven-note major scale to open more opportunities for acoustics
    education and interesting discussions around how many notes are in an octave.
•   Quality of research and publications in ASA is slowly trending downwards. Too much emphasis in overall research on
    machine learning by submissions from researchers who are black boxing, without a deeper understanding of
    classical mathematical techniques. Meetings have become too insular and are not as open to ideas that are
    presented outside of common expertise, with the odd exception of machine learning.
•   recommend bringing in more interdisciplinary people into ASA.
•   Regular online seminars in various sub-disciplines of acoustics. These could be hosted and attended irrespective of
    physical location, with only time-zone and not financial considerations for participants.
•   Research in hearing is generally not popular at the ASA meeting except for psychoacoustics
•   see articles on practical, professional "how-to" tutorials in every area of acoustics.
•   Since ASA has become so focused on Auditory, biological, and speech sciences at the expense of hard sciences over
    the last decade, I've lost interest.
•   Underwater Acoustics, Acoustical Oceanography, Ocean Acoustic Instrumentation
•   multidisciplinary aspect of ASA is useful; however, it is sometimes confusing in meetings to select a TC for
    presentation because of fitting in different disciplines. I don't know if this makes sense, but I wonder if there can be
    a multidisciplinary session. Student involvement was very low at my student chapter and only had attendees from
    one TC (biomedical acoustics). It feels hard to encourage the attendance of other students when it doesn't seem like
    ASA helps with industry connections in my fields, so I would recommend that ASA takes more steps to partner with
    industries but don't really have insight on how to approach this.

Membership
•   Do not fully understand why there is any cost of membership. Membership alone should be free of charge. If anyone
    wants to receive additional benefits, then extra payment should be included.
•   Beyond the "discount" in the ASA meeting registration fee, I do not experience benefits to be an ASA member.
•   Better outreach for international member activities.
•   better support for chapters
•   Cheaper membership fees for early career researchers. Greater funding opportunities for early career researchers.
•   Create new ways to increase membership and make ASA more visible. Re-engage with past members and find out
    what would bring them back to ASA.
•   Hard to find out how to be involved on committees.
•   Cost of professional membership lowered the membership value overall.
•   Membership application should be based on CV alongside the endorsements from current full members/fellows.
•   Associate member to full membership unnecessarily dysfunctional.
•   It is important to build pathways for newer, younger members to understand where and how they can contribute.
    Esp. for ppl form outside USA. Maybe the Social Media platforms can be used to build that first bridge. I would have
    loved or still would love to have some sort of entry points in form of personal contacts/tutors/mentoring.
•   Such a broad organization not easy to connect with disciplines. In my chapter I am the only one that works in my
    discipline area.
•   Engagement opportunities.
•   Engage student members a little bit more.
•   Directory - would be nice to have additional info on people and current activities.
•   Dissolve regional chapters. In a world of virtual meeting participation post COVID, I don’t understand importance.
•   Eliminate "blackball" power of executive council over members, as granted in bylaws. Have members interested in
    technical areas elect members of technical committees.
•   Encourage better use of the senior members to hand down their expertise and perspectives.
•   Conduct activities at the regional level.
•   Added value of the membership is low.
•   Benefit of ASA membership is a little unclear as an Acoustical Consultant.
•   Also, the social benefit appears contrived. My experience at one ASA event was it was rather overwhelming to be
    around so many people, not clear accommodations for people with sensory or social differences. Finally, the
    pressure to be in the group only appears to come from the group itself, I have yet to meet a client that understands
    or cares about what ASA is or does. Also, as a young professional the last 10 years starting my career, it is a high cost
    of both time and money to attend meetings. Our bosses typically don't pay for the time or cost of attendance, and
    do not want us to get away from work to participate. There is a huge block from participation because employers
    overwork us so much, we kind of start to hate the very idea of acoustics. The idea of traveling to go hang out around
    other people doing it at our own expense while paying off massive student loans and trying to survive in bare
    minimum engineering entry salaries makes it practically impossible to even try to engage more, even if at some
    point I wanted to. If there's any way the society could help managers and employers stop working us to burnout, we
    might actually be able and interested in participating and getting the full value out of the society. Maybe offer some
    sort of carrot or stick, such as membership suspension? Or a whistleblowing avenue to a society review board or
    forum for young professionals to rate their bosses and companies, to put pressure on them to create better work
    conditions?
•   conference is very expensive, although I recognize this is hard to fight against.
•   Every ASA Meeting I have been too has felt very disorganized and very big. It seems like some of the Technical
    Groups could be divided out into smaller meetings.
•   Find better ways to include people who are the only representative from their university in the ASA
•   I hope to change my status to a regular member. However, I need help finding two members to recommend that I
    become a regular member. Since I published the last ASA papers, more than 20 years have passed. Recently, I have
    concentrated on Biophysics research, and I always considered restarting my research in biophysical acoustics.
    However, I could not have started yet.
•   I would appreciate a discounted membership rate as I approach retirement. I have not been a member long enough
    to qualify for what is available currently.
•   It is difficult to see the actual value of an ASA membership - besides cheaper meeting rates.
•   I realized I had not used my membership all year, except what came in the mail or email. I chose not to renew. I
    contrast ASA ease of use with organizations such as AES, the comparison is not favorable. I used to like getting the 5
    free standards each year, but it seems that program is gone too. If I need a specific article, I will just purchase it.
•   Make clear what full members need to do to become a full member. It is easy for me to find one full member, but
    one more that can help me I need to contact either someone I have not met for 10 years or someone I have never
    met. It would be good if I knew exactly what they needed to do.
•   Make it easier for industry practitioners to become ASA fellows.
•   Make membership only about acoustics and nothing else.
•   New member outreach
•   Nothing, membership is just less valuable for me than being at the meetings.
•   ongoing engagement with the professional architectural design community.
•   Outreach to other subdisciplines to try and attract larger academic audiences.
•   requirements for converting from associate to full membership in the society could be made less onerous.
•   While retired, completed a PhD on an acoustics subject. It was difficult getting student status. When completed,
    retired and with limited funds have to pay full membership rates for access to the ASA publications. Add a "RETIRED"
    option for those like myself interested in the above publications but have limited financial resources.
•   Make the membership fee cheaper for those just want to access JASA
•   Allow membership directly
Culture
• ASA is very cliquey - and there are more opportunities for the "in crowd" than are available to everyone
• Established members of ASA can be very cliquish; I don't know where I would fit in as a non-academic in the
    meetings.
• Foster more engagement attention and overall support for practicing professionals compared to academics.
• I apply my postgrad acoustic knowledge as part of my Human Factors profession, but membership seems to be
    skewed to full-on acoustic engineers and researchers who are part of the 'club'.
• More industry partnering
• More open and welcome participants
• 'vibe' of ASA is not very inclusive. It's rather stodgy and professorial and not particularly supportive.
Volunteering
• Clarification on Volunteer and leadership opportunities. Otherwise, I find ASA services are professional and
   important to my research and business.
• Don't necessarily see avenues for research member to become more involved in outreach and leadership
   opportunities.
• I have a suggestion for a new committee and would like to open a discussion of Fellows to determine viability.
• I volunteered for some leadership roles and have not been selected or elected to that position.
• I'd love the opportunity to show how I'm applying acoustic analyses to novel problems (speech development in
   neurodevelopmental and genetic disorders)
• If ASA is monetizing the volunteer labor of its members (as it does through standards), ASA had best DIRECTLY and
   INDIVIDUALLY provide benefit to those members.
• Look at operation of numerous ASA committees to ensure that the bureaucracy is minimized and efficiency is
   maximized.
• More support for joining ANSI/ISO working groups
• Provide travel funds for those serving on standards committees
• Volunteer for more regular reviewing of submitted articles.
• For such an important field of research that cuts across so many areas of society, our presence and impacts are
   minimal. ASA needs to do more to develop leaders that fill top roles in academia, gov't, and industry. Without them
   no one is pulling our rope and acoustics will remain on the outside.
Regional/Chapters
• I didn't know there were regional chapters but they have been mentioned in several of these questions - how do I
   find out more about these?
• I wish there were more regional ASA events, in the same way that IEEE has vibrant local chapters hosting events all
   over the USA.
• I would like to see more involvement at a more local environment. Possibly state sections?
• Improve regional chapters organization.
• local meetups
• Make it clear how to find and engage in acoustics meetings/events in my local area (San Diego).
• Make it easier to start a local chapter
• Many of the California regional chapters have a hard time getting going. It would be nice to see regular interest and
   activity.
• More direct contact with local ASA members (local for me would be the greater Kansas City region.
• More opportunities to participate regionally.
• More regional activities would interest me.
•   More regional meetings. I missed the last one in Oakland, Calif., it woulda been good!
•   More support and presentation of ideas for people/firms/regional chapters to try.
•   Offer funding to start a regional chapter in conjunction with the Canadian Acoustical Association
•   Opportunities regionally to learn on both "new" topics and established topics and processes. It can be hard to justify
    a flight/hotel/2+ days away from work to attend an ASA conference, but if there were regional meetings with
    seminars on relevant topics, not all of which have to be NEW information, then I would participate in those.
•   regional chapter near me doesn't seem to be very active. I would attend more meetings if it was more active.
•   regional seminars, tie up with local institutions
•   Supporting more regional activities, especially for outside US areas.
Awards
•   For larger ASA fellowships/awards, the review process should be more transparent and applicants should receive
    some form of written feedback from reviewers. I applied for the postdoc fellowship and it was a completely opaque
    process. I gained little value from the experience, as I had no sense of why my application was not selected, whether
    there were aspects of my research proposal, skills, professional background, etc., that could have been improved,
    and so forth.
•   I got a membership to go to an ASA conference, but am unaware of what else the ASA does.
•   There was a complication when I received a travel grant. I re-submitted the forms several times, did not receive
    confirmation of receipt from the ASA, and ultimately received my stipend almost a year late. I would recommend
    improving the ASA communications team. I think whoever does it must be (understandably so) very busy, and it
    could be an opportunity for more support from other ASA volunteers.
•   Would like to see better and more formal assistance for fellowship applications - the college of fellows appears to be
    overly discriminatory and "Gatekeeping".
Informa(on
•   Brief summaries of recent publications, organized by classification (psychoacoustics, microphone arrays, signal
    processing, underwater acoustics, ...)
•   ASA tends toward more theoretical considerations. It struggles to make itself practical. The general level of
    nonsensical beliefs about sound, especially as prevalent on the internet, is something ASA is well positioned to
    address.
•   More coverage of ultrasonics/physical acoustics
•   Stay current with topics that expand the reach of acoustics and ASA
Advocacy/Outreach
• ASA should be more instrumental in educating the public about the health effects of noise. Don't rely on the NIH or
   CDC. People I meet are always surprised that there are people who study noise (and vibration). We need to
   encourage younger people to consider acoustics and noise control as viable careers that combine their interest(s) in
   math/science, the environment and human well-being. ASA could engage/challenge their regional chapters to reach
   out and partner with under-represented communities
• Look for ways to get acoustics items (publications, members, new results) before the general public. For just one
   example, contact the 'Science Friday' broadcast to see if ASA could provide them with acoustic 'news' on a regular
   basis, perhaps every few months.
• More attention to issues facing practitioners (after all, practitioners are the majority of ASA membership), aspects
   are slowly getting a little better after much effort/attention by several members.
• I recall there being acoustics demo kits/SPL meters that were sent out and I think the continuation/supplementation
   of those programs would be beneficial
Standards
•   Buying voting membership in standards without really participating is faulty. It may be part of the way the world
    works, applying for grants or monies really requires that you have political or other representation in meetings or it
    is very possible your application will get scrapped regardless of your history, thoroughness, inclusion, etc.
•   Make ASA standards easily accessible
•   More engagement with industry to increase the level of information flow, specifically in standards
•   More funding for ASA Standards
•   Most professional societies in science concentrate on developing academic programs aimed at research but
    standards give us a way to directly influence the quality of life. ASA leadership is to be congratulated for not only
    financially supporting the logistics and management functions but also encouraging its members to supply their
    expertise which is critical to developing good standards. Department of Commerce (and Defense) should underwrite
    at least part of this this effort since it is a direct service to the country.
•   Options to have email notifications to members for new standards or existing standards. I am not sure if PDF
    downloads of standards are available. I tried years ago and failed to fine them.
•   Revert to membership including copies of ASA standards. I had to make a special order at my university library
    because ASA does not provide standards to members.
•   Standards are not applicable to the BATC
Diversity
•   ASA should consider expanding its branches in other countries; having local acousticians as their official
    representative. It'll exponentially widen the reach of ASA and will also give opportunities to researchers outside
    India to work in acoustics and might even come up with student exchange program. Early career engineers need
    exposure to basics of acoustics.
•   Create opportunities for more involvement in ASA activities for members outside the US.
•   ASA needs diversity. I became less active in ASA because ASA was not doing anything to support my career growth,
    my network, or support mentorship. It was worth it only if I was attending with a group of senior scientists. Activities
    that allow ASA to be shaped by people who are at different career stages may help the organization meet the needs
    of a broader audience.
•   Commit to supporting scholars from underserved populations.
•   There is too much emphasis on social engineering.
•   ASA should be more open to practitioners and industry
•   ASA still needs more improvement in diversity, recognition of achievements of women and minorities, as well as
    inclusion. Accessibility for those with disability could also be improved.
•   Better communication of opportunities and facilitation of connections, especially for early career and minority
    groups.
•   Connect with Youth before college so that listening to the world around them is key to their sensory experiences.
•   ASA continues to be led and dominated by straight white men. The lack of diversity is stifling the growth of the
    association and the quality of the work published and presented in the journals.
•   More inclusive climate for women innovative opportunities for acoustic outreach and non-traditional
•   Expand meetings, congresses towards Latin America.
•   As someone with neurological learning and social differences, maybe it would be more valuable to me if the
    research and publications were easily accessible in audio form.
Website
• Archival publications and the ability to see the full papers and research. I had a project where I needed to do a little
  bit of research, and the past publications would have helped if I was able to access the actual research instead of the
  abstracts...I was only able to access the abstracts.
• Archival searches occasionally quite tedious
• Definitely website, especially publications section.
• Ease access to publications
• Easier web site, more easily reaching out for knowledge.
• ASA materials are not digitally accessible! We need more cyber-infrastructure for communication within the society.
  Every .pdf should be editable and configured to be easily filled out. This is the one area where I think ASA is frankly
  lacking. There are many areas where ASA is excelling. I just have this one relatively minor, easy-to-address gripe.
• Facilitate researches of documents on the ASA web site, or give a link to associated web site to search of documents.
• Improve the customer friendliness when submitting a manuscript for publication. The ASA website is the most
  complicated and user-unfriendly website that I know. I have pointed this out several times to the ASA staff, but
  unfortunately nothing has changed for the better. This has reduced my number of publications in the journal a lot.
• Make it easier/possible to access technical information
•   managing membership is a huge pain; archaic website. I cannot change membership information easily; it is
    extremely unclear how I can access the journal.
•   Most archived content is very brief, and I feel fortunate if there's even a full abstract. A lot of documents reference
    JASA material, and disappointingly it's only these brief descriptions about a "discussion" that was held at a meeting -
    most of this content was well before I was ever active in ASA, and I'm lucky if the individuals involved with the
    content are still active in the field and/or alive, so a lot of this knowledge feels lost and difficult to find. Better
    documentation would be great to help preserve these references for future generations. Anytime I find a JASA
    reference in a paper, I know 99% of the time it will be a dead-end, and this is extremely disappointing.
•   On line search engine for current and back issues.
•   Online footprint of ASA. Finding information is somewhat unintuitive, as well as simply using an outdated interface.
    The content to be found on the ASA website is super important but I feel that it is hard to access unless you are
    intimately familiar with the website. It is also not very welcoming to students. At least I am not sure what students
    have access to that would enhance the experience. It seems the only benefit is having access to research that my
    professors could share with me. I wish there was more outreach, community, and opportunities as students.
•   web interface to the membership directory is a bit difficult the first few times you use it. Regional chapters have
    increased difficulty getting participation from the area members post-covid.
•   website is still poor. Hard to find things like the membership directory.
Culture
• ASA conference is not very welcoming. Staff is welcoming, but other members are not. ASA as an organization is
    rather sluggish.
• ASA asks too much of its members: too much service, editorial, and review work, too many meetings, too much
    expense for the meetings.
• Encourage innovation, streamline bureaucracy, embrace cutting-edge ideas, and foster a more open culture to
    enhance member satisfaction.
• Be more welcoming to non-degreed professionals at meetings.
Standards
• ASA has an important role in international standardization of underwater acoustics. Recently that role diminished
    for reasons unclear to me. ASA should increase involvement in international standardization.
• Focus more on practicality for standards.
• ASA standards need some social media or publicity and something to attract younger people. The involvement
    process isn’t transparent.
• Would like to see Structural Acoustics TC reverse its current trend toward irrelevance.
Social Media
• ASA Instagram posts are challenging --- the imagery used is often strange/not compelling and the links provided are
    in text form, so they're not clickable (they must be copied/pasted into a browser, which is inconvenient).
• ASA social media looks too technical. Good for professionals but not external outreach
• Establish order in posts and enforce Social Media Toolkit standards. Open social networks for each region where you
    are active and monitor the chapter presidents so that they do not do monotonous activities and truly integrate
    students or people who do not have advanced knowledge in Acoustics. You don't see that at conventions either.
• Keep pushing on social media! :)
• Maybe have an ASA Blog/Twitter account (maybe it does and I don't know about it)
• social media accounts could use some work.
• social media seems to be very focused on marine sounds, I wonder why...
• we need more social media announcement and we need technical podcast. made by ASA
• Your social media profiles are definitely an area for improvement. You get very few views and likes; it wouldn't take
    a lot to streamline content and increase visibility
Communications
• "ASA announcements" sometimes too much email, including multiple announcements regarding same thing.
•   ASA Announcements are often irrelevant but not bothersome because they are easy to filter. I find some helpful,
    especially special talks and reminders regarding SURIEA. I always forward those on to potential mentors in the
    Federal Government.
•   ASA Membership provides access to a lot of resources, but it is not always transparent what it provides access to.
•   Better gather as many acoustics’ meetings/conferences information as possible, and not just ASA meetings. At
    present, there is no single reference point for acoustics-related meetings.
•   Create OPT OUT from non-relevant content, emails, voting and events.
•   Get help in marketing, fundraising and business development from some non-scientists.
•   learn more about ASA's mentor programs.
•   Monthly email notifications for JASA content to be unorganized and hard to digest, and this has prevented me from
    delving into an issue as much as I did when I used to receive the print version, which had the table of contents
    organized by different areas, alphabetically (e.g., "Acoustical Oceanography", "Animal Bioacoustics", etc.). Could not
    the email better reflect this organization instead of just presenting the article titles in what seems to be a somewhat
    random order? There's a button at the bottom to go to "Complete TOC issue" but that's yet another step to take...
•   More (clear) outreach for non-US members
•   More awareness of outreach and volunteer opportunities
•   Not enough announcements about external engagement (outreach or regional ASA gatherings). Not sure if they are
    not happening or I am just not on the email distribution list(s). If it is just a distribution list discrepancy, I suggest
    sending a link out somewhat regularly (every 6 months or year) to remind members to check on/update their email
    distribution and how to do so. I would love to be more engaged with local ASA members.
•   notifications to come sooner so we can request funding from our own institutions. Lower registration costs of
    meetings
•   Provide newsletters via email (perhaps every 4 months) with information about ASA matters and opportunities on
    how to get involved or funding opportunities etc...
•   Send more information by email about different news, topics, opportunities, and scholarships
•   There seem to be many items in the weekly Acoustics Topic Alert newsletter that have nothing to do with acoustics
    at all. I would like to see those filtered out of the list.
Young Professionals/Students
• Areas of outreach and education and of mentoring students. More involvement at the undergraduate level. We tend
   to focus at either the high school/elementary level or at the graduate level.
• Help establishing mentoring opportunities for students, younger faculty, younger researchers
• Provide training to younger members in new and emerging technologies
• Lack of resources or opportunities for exploring career paths, other than some of the more traditional roles that are
   more present at ASA, such as academic positions or DoD jobs (in my TCs). As a postdoc I found it challenging to
   identify non-academic options. Isn't much National Lab, Industry, or Consulting representation (outside of the AA
   TC), like to see more areas represented at ASA, more effort connecting students and postdocs with career
   opportunities.
• More educational material focused at high school pupils.
• More efforts to help early career professionals get started.
• more funding allocated to early career/student members
• More student/entry level opportunities.
• More support for early careers
• Based on experiences of my grad students, it would be really helpful to add "educational resources" to your list, to
   develop both educational resources and professional development resources as an expanded service.
• I wish there were more student activities outside of meetings.
Cost
• Cost (5) of attending meetings, of meeting registration is getting too high, causing me to attend less often than I
   would like. Though I am well aware of the rapidly rising costs for most goods... ASA meetings are notably more
   expensive than other meetings that I attend. Decrease the cost of attending an ASA meeting by lowering registration
   fees, offering 1-day registration for multiple days, offering discounted hotel costs for ASA meetings.
•   Cost of meetings is outrageous. I am not in industry. I can barely afford to maintain my involvement. Moreover, I
    have many food allergies and regularly cannot eat at the socials or drink coffee during coffee hours - it is infuriating
    to pay full registration and not enjoy full benefits. With every successive meeting I am more resentful.
•   Cost of the conferences/meetings is extremely high and increasing too much; becoming less accessible and more
    elite which is counterproductive to science
•   Cost of meetings and publication charges is prohibitive. I have been fortunate thus far, but without grant funding I
    cannot afford to attend the meetings, or publish papers in JASA-EL, or in JASA with papers >12 pages.
•   Membership fees should be less. (3)
•   If conference attendance fees could be lower (considering today's environment), it would be very attractive to be
    participating regularly. I remember paying a very large fee for a fully-virtual meeting. Clearly, the organization and
    human resources have to be covered, as that is part of every conference. If a venue was not used, it wasn't clear
    why the fee was not lower.
•   JASA books were excellent and cheap. Now they are rather expensive.
•   Keep meeting costs down, especially so more junior members can attend.
•   Less expensive membership
•   lower meeting registration fee (2)
•   Lower cost for semi-professional adult (non-student) membership
•   Lower registration costs for ASA meetings. My university travel allowance barely covers registration.
•   Maintain costs as low as possible
•   Meeting expense is getting way too high for the benefit it brings to members. Continuing this trend, ASA meetings
    may lose its appeal to other smaller meetings.
•   Membership fee is becoming very high, even compared with other societies for clinicians and professionals.
•   Meeting hotels have gotten more expensive and have exceeded government per diem rates. When this happens, we
    must stay sometimes far away from the meeting site, something I never do.
•   Membership and meeting fees too expensive for the benefits.
•   Membership and registration costs are pretty high. Not sure that can be helped and still get everything out of it we
    like. I like to keep student costs low. I get more out of ASA than more specific field associations, so I'd keep it over
    others if I had to choose.
•   membership fee is a little pricy for me as a student.
•   membership fee is way too expensive
•   Membership is becoming expensive. Since my institution pays for JASA, I'm not sure what I'm paying for any more.
•   Membership is expensive if you don't have university funding to pay for it.
•   most expensive society I belong to. As an interdisciplinary person, I belong to 4 professional societies... Perhaps
    consider dividing up the society into subsocieties (a la the IEEE).
•   Please consider lowering the membership fee.
•   Reducing membership dues for my country and providing research support for education
•   Registration fee is ridiculously expensive; I only get $1.2K for research and travel, this barely pays for registration
    and flight, have to spend my own money on hotel, etc.
•   There has just got to be a way to make ASA meetings cheaper for students again. The high non-student registration
    fee was OK when it was free for students, or close to free. But my students just cannot afford travel plus a couple
    hundred dollars for registration. It has to be possible to cut some expenses to make ASA meetings more accessible.
•   Very expensive to attend conference! I come from linguistics, so it’s not common to see registration fees that high.
Funding/Cost
• Increase funding for people to travel to meeting Increase free training in areas of acoustics that are rising
   (software/active noise control)
• Increased funds for fellowships
• more funding opportunities for graduate students to attend the meetings
• More funding resources and acknowledgment to those of us who work with underrepresented students
• More opportunities for funding should be available, not just for students, but early career and seasoned
   professionals.
•   Publishing needs to keep up with funding demands (non-hybrid CC-BY); while whole meetings do not (always) need
    to cater to ASA's international audience, the TCs should.
•   Support for retirees to attend meetings.
•   There should be full funding opportunities to travel and attend the meetings of ASA.
Advocacy/Outreach
• ASA needs to advocate more for the importance of underwater acoustics. I had to change careers because there just
   isn't enough *funded* work. Acousticians are a dedicated bunch, but my profession needs to support me.
• Can ASA meet with INCE or SAE Noise and Vibration?
• The acoustics industry is losing ground every day. Federal funding in acoustics and noise was defunded in 1981 and
   almost 45 years later I do not see any real efforts to fight for our industry. ASA is too insular and in the building
   industry AIA has used their money and power to make acoustics almost irrelevant.
Diversity
• Acoustics profession is not very diverse - ideally would be more women and more People of Color, specifically Black
    people in our field. We should target educational opportunities to places like HBCUs to aim to diversify the field.
• ASA grants and Fellowships can be looked at more closely especially in terms of diversity and outreach of fellowship
• Experienced ageism and still experience sexism in my TCAA and sometimes in the larger ASA community.
• Experienced elitism from research and educational based professionals as a practicing professional.
• Improve opportunities for men in leadership positions
• involving Asian, African, and other region members.
• Less preoccupation with diversity. I pretty much lost interest in the ASA after receiving a "diversity questionnaire."
• Maintain your focus on science. Ignore social/political issues.
• Prizes and awards are not given to female or minority members. We made comparisons and for awards and medals
    women need to publish twice more or have 5-10 more years of experience to gain the same recognition as men,
    does not feel ok.
• Stop focusing so much about social and political issues (pronouns on badges, considering not holding ASA meetings
    at locations with "bad" politics, weighing in on topics outside of the scope of acoustics). The views often expressed
    by the society are not representative of all of us and taking views that ASA has no expertise in seriously risks
    alienating members. Focus on the science of acoustics.
• Young professional attendance at meetings is encouraged by lip service, but not supported by actions before during
    or after ASA meetings. Current social media is ok, but needs to be much better and more frequent to promote
    acoustics beyond current community size.
International
• No interest in the Middle East (Egypt)... I disappointed feel like there is no interest in acoustics in Egypt also... none
    of my clients contacted me because I'm ASA member...
• Create more opportunities for scientists in countries other than USA, working in Acoustics, to attend ASA meetings,
    workshops and other events and possibly facilitate funding for the same.
• Increased opportunities for low and middle-income countries. Can we have a meeting in Mexico?
• International meetings MUST be more frequent, and MUST be given more "lead time" for abstract submission and
    acceptances.
• Less meetings outside US. Travel Awards may be more valuable if fewer are offered for a larger amount.
• Naturally ASA, as many other professional associations, is orientated very much towards the needs of the US
    American members. This is very natural and makes much sense. Nevertheless, this might drive away some folks that
    cannot afford the costs of ASA membership or participation in ASA meetings. Think of students of young researchers
    from Latin America or Central America for instance. I am aware that these are not the focus of ASA, but the high
    costs certainly drive many of the away.
• Current rules for full membership discriminate against non-US as it is impossible to gain member references
    required since there are few in AU/NZ. It is rare for us to be able to meet or liaise due to geographic hurdles and I
    totally understand that someone would be wary of providing a reference to someone else that they do not know.
• Frequency of ASA meetings being held outside US is a concern since it restricts our ability to participate and
    discourages students from being able to attend. Travel is expensive, difficult, and environmentally unsustainable.
Other
• I wonder if the NOISE-CON Congress and Conference is a bigger draw for other practitioners in my field?
• impression I and others at my firm have been that ASA does not deliver significant benefit for those in the field of
   architectural acoustics. The National Council of Acoustical Consultants (NCAC) seems to generally meet this need
   much better.
• In the past I have enjoyed the meetings, but my more recent work has pulled me a bit away from the ASA meeting
   and to more CogNeuro type meetings. I found more there than I had expected. This is nothing that is the fault of the
   ASA, but more how fields have changed and my own personal work.
• I am not convinced that the Society is adequately preparing itself for the future.
• Increase the amount of accomplishments
• involve industry better
• I'm always presented posters rather than talks, so more opportunities for talks would be great.
• More relevant presentations (a lot of company advertising in presentations)
• I object to use of 'industry' instead of 'practitioner', which is more inclusive. To me, 'practitioners' include both
   professionals working as part of businesses and in the public sector (Governments or NGOs), whereas 'industry' does
   not!
• area of noise in human perception can be extended to any kind of person including mental health problem due to
   noise
• For the TAG voting, I am a new contributor and wish to learn more about required responsibilities for voting and
   how to best participate.
• I am not sure how ASA can increase its relevance in Germany, especially since DEGA is so big here.
• ASA has been of critical importance to my career. All components add coherently, so it is more than sum of its parts!
• I have a rather on-line relationship with ASA and am not able to attend its conferences often, for various reasons. I
   have a high level of respect for the technical committees, awards and other non-JASA activities, but they seem
   rather distant to me personally.
• I haven't utilized everything I could be and don't have very much time at the moment.
• I probably need to do more direct digging on my own or have someone provide suggestions and direction to sub-
   groups that have better fit for my areas of expertise and practice.
• I work in a sound and vibration lab, I participate in standards, it is just tough trying to find time to be more active
   ASA. I like the ASA meetings when I am allowed to attend if budgets allow my travel.
• Improve cross-disciplinary involvement with machine learning.
• It is more my employment situation than ASA offerings. In my opinion ASA is doing a great job especially recognizing
   the importance to reach out, opportunity to involve members and advertise possibilities
• Maintained membership in honor of Leo Beranek and paid to support group so others could benefit. Personally,
   didn't need membership for my own personal benefit or my employer since I owned the business. I feel confident
   that others were able to benefit from their membership and would want ASA to focus on those members.
• publishment of "echo" was very interesting.
• Recently ASA responded promptly to a requested change of email.
• The problem is owing to myself. Improving the environment around me is the most important subject. My affiliation
   is relatively focused on education, so time for research is relatively shorter.
• To busy running my own consulting practice to be very involved.
• What you want from the Society changes with time
• Whatever the board decides to alter based on these poll results is important for developing countries, even though
   these changes might not happen right away.
• I desperately want to help ASA, but just have no idea how to be effective in aiding this necessary transformation.
• ASA is my "home" society and I have very few complaints about it.
• My only limitation for participation at this point is related to funding.
• Society would greatly benefit from required POMA articles if presenting.
• Advertising more online conferences
For what reasons are you less likely to renew your ASA membership?
• Cost (17) Benefit ratio, after retirement. Cost is getting higher and it does not result in decent enough discount in
    meeting registration fee for the members. Dues are ok for students but very expensive for others; as a student, I
    would probably keep renewing until or if I become a professional in the field, if I pay out of pocket it is very
    expensive. High cost of meetings and feeling more disconnected from the society because of not being able to afford
    to attend regularly. Financial constraints. Economic reasons. Lack of Funding support. Too expensive. Usually a
    matter of funding. Very low cost/benefit rate for members outside North America

Others
• Acoustics is less relevant in my current position.
• Although the resources are great, it's hard to still be only an associate after a few decades of membership. I joined
   as a postgrad student in acoustical psychophysics and have applied these principles in my HF consulting, but there
   are few in my region who have the knowledge to understand my area and the ASA membership status to progress
   my membership.
• Another area of academia (cosmology and the standard model) is receiving most of my time with less emphasis on
   acoustics. Also, I am seeing government contractors that fund underwater acoustics pay less attention to basic
   research--- so why bother. Sorry about the pessimistic viewpoint
• As previously stated, copy-paste: The pathway to involvement is not clear (e.g., how to volunteer in women in
   acoustics? diversity was previously not a factor considered in 2005-2015, not sure if that changed); senior scientists
   often dominated the dialogue in technical committee meetings when I was an early stage investigator, and lastly,
   the journal has consistently rejected articles of new ideas in favor of established views; reviewers were not
   encouraging of a pathway to publication of good science instead of rejecting articles based on disagreement of the
   premises.
• ASA charges a lot of money for membership and conferences and has very little to show for it. ASHRAE, USGBC,
   ASTM have now become the true torchbearers in acoustics. ASA should be sponsoring research, pushing for codes,
   and showing the world the value of acoustics.
• ASA does a poor job of serving those whose careers are focused on architectural acoustics.
• ASA is not interested in Egypt. Egypt is not interested in acoustics. Business in acoustics is really limited here.
• Becoming less applicable to my professional career.
• Benefits for those that live outside of North America are low
• Change of Topic after PhD
• Changing fields; taking an industry position and not getting value from networking with academics
• Content is too closely related to academia/too theoretic and not very relevant for state-of-the-art industry.
   Considering this, it's too expensive for me as a single person who has to fight for every penny in my company.
• Current evidence shows that my PhD is worthless and pursuing alternative career options has become necessary.
• Currently not working in acoustics, but I still have an interest.
• Depends if I need the journal or not, my job will never pay for me to go to meetings so I'll just never go again even
   though I would like to
• depends on funding and where I am with my education.
• Did not benefit much from it.
• Difficult to take advantage of membership now that I have left my graduate program
• Difficulty in justification of budget
• Disappointing that conferences were being held internationally in Australia and Canada, followed by remote
   sessions. While I could have participated in all of them, it was frustrating that the organizers did not consider the
   situation of international students residing in the US who are unable to leave the country.
• Do not have time to read
• Don’t feel presenting at the ASA meetings give me enough benefits for the cost of traveling to them.
• Don't find a lot of value from the membership (I can access JASA and JASA-EL through my institution) besides the
   opportunity to participate in leadership roles in the society. However, I have not found much value from donating
   my time to organize sessions, serve on committees, etc. - it seems to be unappreciated.
• Economic reasons
• Employer no longer covers cost or sends me to meetings. Everything is getting so expensive; salaries stay the same...
•   Expensive, don't get reimbursed for it
•   Feel very unwelcome in ASA. Tried to publish several times in JASA, and quite a few times we got rude responses
    from reviewers and/or editors including asking us to cite their papers, which had nothing to do with the subject
    treated in the manuscript (very unethical).
•   For the discounts for the ASA meetings
•   Going into the field of medical physics and am not sure how related ASA will be down the line.
•   Graduating
•   Haven't gotten anything out of it. I only signed up originally because I received a discount through my school's
    chapter when I was a student. Most communication I receive are Acoustics Today, Physics Today, and emails about
    the upcoming conferences, which I do not attend.
•   Heavily relies on theoretical and provides less resources and benefits for industry members
•   I am already retired and may be retired from academia in five years.
•   I am looking to go into industry when I graduate this year (hopefully), and if my employer allows conference
    attendance, other conferences better cover my needs (speech technology in health such as vocal biomarker
    research has more presence in Interspeech; if I go into ultrasound imaging instead IEEE UFFC has more applicability
    in subjects unrelated to therapeutic ultrasound such as fabrication).
•   I near graduation from grad school without any job prospects at this point, and the cost of a non-student
    membership is simply too high to warrant renewing the membership again.
•   I have a PhD in Acoustics, worked in the field 12 years, yet and I am still an 'associate', i.e. someone interested in
    acoustics. Seems a little bit of on unnecessary hurdle to become full member, when one has the qualifications.
•   I live in Asia.
•   If I can’t find a job, I may not be stay in the field or attend the annual meeting in future (really relates to expenses)
•   If not a Fellow, I doubt I would still be a member. My university gets JASA and my grants pay the registration fee if I
    go to the conference, so I have little need to personally pay the dues.
•   Institution access to JASA provided by the employer.
•   Insufficient benefit received
•   JASA has moved away from memberships, what is important in my daily work (e.g., theory and application in
    acoustic and elasto-dynamic radiation, scattering). I'm a research Geophysicist in the Oil & Gas industry.
•   lack of current use...my own fault
•   Lack of inclusion of ASA standards through membership.
•   Lack of relevance to non-academic underwater acoustics industry.
•   Lack of time to benefit from it.
•   lack of workshops about noise control
•   Leaving academia, uncertain of usefulness of membership for my career
•   Less applicable to my field of research, compared to other societies (aerospace engineering acoustics).
•   Less opportunities for European audiences, less focused on non-auditory health effects of noise
•   Like to be recognized of my achievement to Acoustics over the years by being recognized as a Fellow.
•   limited profile of my discipline in the meetings
•   Limited work budget for memberships so I need to pick and choose. ASA isn't always best bang for the buck.
•   Lots of content that is unrelated to my field (underwater acoustics)
•   Main value comes from the in-person meetings and publishing. I've had experiences in which the review process was
    handled inappropriately. Meetings are TOO expensive, especially for students and postdocs. It's not an inclusive
    organization if the people who want to be involved are priced out.
•   Meeting attendance increasingly difficult for non-PI, non-presenters to justify expense, further removing relevance
    and benefit if ASA membership
•   Membership dues have become quite high in recent years.
•   Might be exiting acoustics profession
•   No longer active technically at some point my membership will be a cost burden to ASA
•   No longer in a relevant field
•   Not (yet?) very involved, not sure how my involvement may or may not expand over the next several years.
•   not attending meeting
•   Not feeling the best return for cost currently.
•   Not having the time to fully benefit from membership resources and benefits.
•   Not sure how much acoustics research I will be pursuing in the future.
•   not sure if the cost will be worth it long-term. I enjoy reading the publications and enjoy the potential to reach out
    to colleagues, especially as it could give me access to the U.S. lens of acoustics which is certainly different than the
    German one. However, I hardly ever get to use that potential, as the meetings in the US are unaffordable to me and
    reaching out virtually is hard unless you have already established a contact and gotten to know each other
•   Opportunities for travelling/communication are decreasing, so I end up paying without really benefiting
•   Other meetings that are more relevant to my work in structural vibrations.
•   Other memberships serve me better, if I had to choose to parse costly annual memberships, I might not choose to
    keep ASA.
•   Planning to graduate in next one or two years and move into industry in signal processing/machine learning areas
•   Price
•   Professional development and recognition
•   retirement, but I like Acoustics Today
•   Semi-retired, lack of funding although I would like to stay engaged. ASA membership has never been converted to
    full, from when I was associate after my PhD. I'm just not willing to devote the energy for this despite being a full
    professor and published now. This hiccup also prevented me from nominating someone for an award, and has likely
    kept me off standards work. Although I'm interested in that work, I suspect I would not devote much time to it now.
•   Should somehow factor in "deliberate" loss of interest in ASA and its activities. If I could answer in retrospect "when
    I was younger and active" I would give totally different answers.
•   So, I can access JASA, so it’s available in case I decide to pursue a personal acoustical project.
•   Still don't have clear data how can I be more involved to be able to benefit the most
•   Still don't know its benefits, just a new member of ASA.
•   too expensive and the next meeting is online. The last online one was a disaster
•   Unable to attend ASA Meetings with my new job, at least for the first couple of years, so it is difficult to justify
    paying for an ASA membership.
•   Unclear how it benefits me. I rarely attend conferences now, and my institution pays for the journal access.
•   Unfortunately, I had to leave the field -- I cannot make a living at it. There are too many players in a small field, too
    much time dealing with difficult CEOs (they are all nuts) and not enough time in product development and research.
    Chasing government money and being let go the minute the money runs out is not an effective career plan. Unless
    the size of the underwater acoustics market grows tenfold, professional product development is difficult to sustain.
•   Website is not user friendly at all. It is very difficult to find professional articles that are useful. Often articles are not
    free or available to me even though I am a full paid member. Most of the articles the search engines return is not at
    all useful. By comparison, other acoustical industry society websites are much, much better at returning useful
    professional content. Website interface and login changes every couple years, it seems. Search results mostly return
    only abstracts, which have no useful content and serve no use. Sometimes searches return results that are not free
    or available to me as a member, which is not useful. Almost every time I search for professional articles through
    ASA, the process takes much longer than anticipated, and virtually never returns anything of any use whatsoever.
•   Woke and DEI bullshit.
•   Working in other fields
What do you regard as important challenges facing acoustics in the next few years?

Workforce Dynamics
• A somewhat skewed practitioner field in my discipline - e.g. animal bioacoustics and noise impact - towards non-
   biologists that do not always have appropriate training in biology
• AA technical session has more industry presentation than academic
• AAA becoming too expensive for members from academia
• Acoustical product manufacturers providing "free" acoustical design.
• Acoustics rarely has its own academic department, so this dilutes the voices supporting hiring junior faculty in
   acoustics even as gov't and industry need more people trained in acoustics
• Aging leaders are not stepping aside to let early and mid-career scientists gain leadership experience
• Although AI impacts on Acoustics, importance of human-machine interactions via sound and vibration are not
   changed.
• ASA has nothing to do with my work.
• Big issue, I cannot find Acoustic professionals to fill open positions at my company.
• Challenge getting the public to “see” the implication of acoustics on real-life issues and problems
• Challenge of translating acoustic needs and goals to end users.
• Challenge to couple physical acoustics with behavior (of fish and zooplankton)
• clear disconnect between architectural acoustics and rest of the acoustic community
• Community noise control is in the hands of non-acoustical professionals and average people who need
   educated/helped for FREE. ASA and academia need to teach noise control to engineers/designers/technicians/public
   as part of their education. There is no money for noise control except if your business will cease, then money
   becomes available. No community noise criteria will be able to deal with a diverse set of ever-changing issues. EPA's
   attempt failed; litigation is the failure of good judgement and planning. Community noise is an individual experience.
• connecting academia and the real world
• Costs to host meetings in large cities has increased.
• difficulty getting funding for acoustics of speech research
• Difficulty in keeping up with the increasing diversity in the field of acoustics
• Difficulty of supporting professionals in my topic area
• Difficulty working as professional acoustic engineer
• Drawing collaborative attention to widely-needed open-source software needs at the global scale (e.g., an accurate,
   flexible, fast 3-D sound propagation modelling engine in a major language)
• Employers overworking young acousticians to burnout. insufficient pay for cost of living for entry and early career.
   Bad managers and bosses who can't manage workflow. companies actually thinking that 2 weeks of earned vacation
   and 2 weeks of sick time is enough after a global pandemic. Wages don't increase faster than inflation.
• Failure to successfully develop and implant the use of AI in applied acoustics.
• Getting knowledge of acoustics to students appropriately
• Govt failures to recognize impacts in drawing policy
• Great Silver Psunami (Baby boomers retiring out)
• Having "Acoustic-savvy people" in NIH study sections
• I am a sonographer. None of this applies to me or what I do.
• Industry unable to pay well, for reasons ticked above
• involvement level insufficient to respond
• Difficult to access JASA from government entities.
• lack of commercial and industry partnerships
• Lack of connection between academic research and substantive real-world application. Without relevance, we're a
   sideshow.
• lack of diversity
• Lack of effort to get 25- to 45-year-old acoustician in industry to join ASA
• Lack of federal funding in Acoustics
• Lack of modern biological emphasis
•   Lack of recognition for Acoustics in leadership positions and/or places like National Academies
•   little funding for work on sonar
•   making acoustics a household word in public school and high school could help
•   narrowing funding available as ONR budget dwindles and NSF won't touch acoustics
•   Need to improve the practical mechanical aspects of acoustics
•   Not enough acoustics courses in Australia. More specialists required to consult about music education and acoustics.
•   Not enough high-paying jobs in Acoustics
•   Not really in the "Acoustic" industry, have no experience-based opinions.
•   Our knowledge is too inaccessible to architects
•   overall lack of understanding of human perception and psychophysics
•   Risk of ASA becoming too politically active
•   Starting to see ocean acoustics as a "dying field"
•   Stop catering to ML "experts" who read abstracts and consider themselves as understanding a paper.
•   Students being poorly trained/educated.
•   Students especially of color, can feel so completely out of place when they arrive at ASA meeting that they're
    unlikely to return. We can get them into our field and labs, but doesn't make the ASA meetings welcoming to them.
•   Too many people chasing too few projects
•   Too much pressure to be a sociological organization
•   Understanding of the global ocean soundscape and its effect on the ocean's inhabitants
•   Severe dearth of international standards in underwater acoustics
•   unrealistic salary expectations for new graduates

Research Patterns
• Acoustical modeling software updates/integration with 3D modeling software used by architects/civil engineers (ex:
   REVIT) not able to keep up with the rapidly growing demand for fast acoustical modeling in the consulting industry
• Advances in other technologies raising the public's expectation for similarly dramatic advances in acoustics that are
   unrealistic.
• As a community we have become simulation- and theory-heavy. Many papers and articles promise fantastic results
   on paper, but will they actually work? We need the theory, but I personally worry that we are starting to confuse 'it
   worked in MATLAB' with 'it works.'
• Background of many researchers working in animal bioacoustics lack good understanding of basic biology i.e. animal
   acoustics in an evolutionary framework to ask the right questions about why animals use sounds, when and where.
• Being in one of those fields that intersects acoustics (Linguistics), these things don't strike me as problems.
• business metrics/marketing patterns applied to science disciplines
• I am not involved with doing research in Acoustics, so don't have any experience-based opinions here.
• I am speaking to improved collaboration with governmental stake holders such as GSA.
• Ideas at the intersection of disciplines are not enough valued
• Industry expects Academia to provide graduate-trained students "for free"; that's not sustainable.
• industry unwillingness to fund acoustic research
• Insufficient research done into the effects of acoustics, particularly retaining to wildlife
• intellectual snobbery in physics community
• involvement level insufficient to respond
• Lack of collaborative partnerships between other associations/industry to advance common interests due to the
   profit model and not the scientific model. Facts often lose to profit.
• Lack of emphasis on sub 100 Hz energy control and treatments in architectural acoustics
• lack of multidisciplinary integration of biologists and physicists
• lack of strategy of how to transition basic to applied research in ocean acoustics--- becomes more focused on politics
   as opposed to the science
• Lack of university and/or US government research in building acoustics.
• Loudspeaker manufacturers try to manipulate room acoustics into their advantage
• More health impact issues
•   Most research I've seen in the articles really isn't applicable to a consulting making money in the field. The research
    is great, but doesn't impact my work.
•   Need more Allied efforts to see important practical research to benefit the public
•   No money for noise control. We seek the cheapest option which excludes the additional expense to make things
    quieter. Less noise almost always implies more effort (money) and therefore only those with the foresight of failure
    can appreciate the expense. When they need to pay to keep the machines going, the money flows like wine.
•   peer review standards
•   personal opinions can cause challenges in dissemination of research results
•   Relatively low understanding among policymakers of the value of the acoustics field, a second time
•   Repeating and updating fundamental research is unfunded but necessary
•   Rising number of for-profit, open-access journals
•   Too diversified. Too much emphases on linguistics, psychology, etc. that I am not interested in, which is why I do not
    attend ASA meetings any more.
•   Ultrasound has less chance to get funding as NIH study section are more MRI/CT/PET friendly
•   underqualified people who do not have a base understanding in acoustics (e.g. IEEE engineers with little concept of
    human perception) who publish poor research due to lack of robust review

What do you regard as important issues for ASA over the next several years?
• Acousticians often only talk among themselves. Our research is often adjacent to, but not part of larger
  scientific/engineering disciplines.
• An acoustic certification demonstrating different levels of knowledge
• ASA should increase emphasis on industry and consulting, as opposed to academia
• Attracting underrepresented minorities to the profession
• Balance academic and practitioners
• Becoming more affordable
• Becoming more aware and competent of AI's influence on acoustics - short- and long-term
• Cloud computation and AI news should be discussed in every issue of Acoustics today. Data processing and analysis
  driven by embedded systems, sensors, and AI predicted state changes presented with multi-variable graphics to
  widen understanding and discussions. Weekly webcam meetings promoting all disciplines of
  acoustics/noise/vibration. Endless on demand tutorials linked to ultra-efficient ASA search engines. An ASA version
  of real time activity feeds like Instagram where sharing, posting, and saving is similar to LinkedIn.
• Collaboration with other organizations such as the AES.
• Connecting better with architects
• Do more than conferences and allow posts to make groups more dynamic. They have to reach students with a low
  level in Acoustics because not all courses have that focus and are empirical and cannot compete with someone
  privileged who managed to enter a renowned university and obtain an accredited master's degree in acoustics.
• Double dipping in "open access" charges must stop, period. Universities subscriptions should cover costs for open-
  access publishing. AIP is following that model.
• Dwindling research funding levels overall.
• Elimination of free copies of acoustical standards for members
• Enhancing ability for virtual presence at ASA
• Ensure meetings are equitably distributed and available to all ASA members regardless of politics or geography
• Include Architectural Design Professionals in community of professionals responsible for successful acoustics.
• Fixing the online access by managing it in-house. Dump the 3rd parties
• Fund research and write standards.
• Getting local events going
• Help ASA numbers obtain visa to attend ASA events
• Hold more meetings at domestic locations and eliminate virtual meetings, international meetings drive away the
  younger scientists who can't afford them and virtual meetings don't allow collaboration
• Holding more meeting outside of USA, for example, once pre year
• I am not informed enough to answer
• Impact factor of JASA is simply not competitive, and I am unable to consider it as a destination as a consequence.
•   Improve the method to submit manuscripts to the journal
•   Improving international attractivity and outreach
•   Increase awareness among " environmentalists"
•   Increase the impact factor of JASA and JAS-EL
•   increasing demographic diversity in acoustics (and ASA) to reflect the demographics of our country
•   increasing involvement in international standardization of underwater acoustics
•   Increasing the demographic diversity of ASA membership, but not necessarily to reflect the profession.
•   increasing the impact of JASA
•   Instead of "Retaining more early career professionals as ASA members" perhaps "Inviting more professionals to
    become Full Members of the Society"? Becoming a Full Member felt like an ordeal to me.
•   involvement level insufficient to respond
•   Involving Military and Military contractors more to the extent that they are able
•   JASA meetings considered as irrelevant in Aeroacoustics and drone noise community. There is a huge disconnect
•   Like to participate in helping develop further ASA in regards to these items.
•   Lobbying sponsors to open funding opportunities
•   Lowering cost of meetings or going to once annual meetings
•   Make efforts to capture datasets and software for future researchers to duplicate/surpass research results. Data is
    expensive to acquire in underwater acoustics.
•   making it more practical to attend meetings (fewer meetings, support)
•   making the meetings affordable
•   Meetings are not accessible to many with disabilities.
•   Method with which fees for publishing in JASA are calculated is not rational.
•   More engagement with regulatory agencies to update acoustical standards
•   More focus on music listening and AI listening research and funding, and music traditions globally
•   More involvement/inclusion of granting agency reps (NIH, NSF)
•   more thorough documentation of what is covered in meetings
•   Move away from social issues and back to SCIENCE!
•   Need to get Acoustics studies earlier in Academia. Undergraduate would be good.
•   Not going woke and down the toilet.
•   Preventing small groups...maybe if that is the case. We definitely have a case in AA where awards that go through
    other disciplines fail to recognize non-academic achievement
•   Public health messaging and medical impact
•   Regional options? H
•   Having zoom meetings in internationally-friendly time zones and encourage us to participate?
•   Re-publish (re-typeset) oft-cited foundational papers; poor copy quality
•   Retain bottom-up, member-driven culture of society. Top-down, or staff-driven approach will put us on a downward
    slide to irrelevance.
•   Reviving policy limited free ANSI standards for members
•   set up ASA Hong Kong branch
•   Success & Failure Spotlight; showcase positive outcomes and lessons learned so the entire community can benefit
    from validated accomplishments and/or work of others.
•   Two meetings a year is both financially and environmentally costly
•   variety
•   Very dissatisfied with the field and would not recommend it to anyone. No money for acoustics and tired of
    surviving on thin air and spitting into the wind. Our best and brightest want to be working in areas that will give
    them the greatest rewards; personal and financial. I don't see it in my business; that era ended just before I began
    working for BBN and I have been just wallowing in the ashes for my career. Sadly, I wish I went to Lincoln Labs.
Other National/Global Association Memberships: Those Who Indicated Other Primary Affiliation than ASA
• AAA (5), AAPM, AAS (10), ABAV, NAG, ABS, ACM, Acoustical Society of Chile SOCHA, Acoustical society of Japan (26),
   Acoustical Society of Korea, Acoustical Society of Norway, Acoustofluidics, AES (38), AFCP (Association Française de
   la Communication Parlée), AGU (3), AHRI, AIA (3), AIAA Aeroacoustics (10), AIHA, AIUM (5), American Academy of
   Audiology AAA (4), American Association for the Advancement of Science, American Auditory Society (10), American
   Dialect Society, American Geophysical Union (2), American Ornithological Society, American Society of Mechanical
   Engineers, American Speech and Hearing Association ASHA (4), AMS, Animal Behavior Society, American Physical
   Society APS (5), APTA, ARO (15), ASC, ASHA (6), ASHRAE (5) TC 2.6, ASJ (10), ASMA, ASME (12), ASNE, ASNT (2)
• Asociación de Acústicos de Argentina, Association for Laboratory Phonology (2), Association for Research in
   Otolaryngology ARO (10), Association of Computing Machinery (multi media), Association of Noise Consultants,
   Associazione Italiana di Acustica, ASTM (5), Audio Engineering Society (16), Audiology related (2), Australian
   Acoustical Society (8), AVIXA, Barany Soc., Biophysical Society, British Academy of Audiology (2), British Society of
   Audiology (2), CAA (5) ACA, Canadian Academy of Audiology, Canadian Acoustical Association (7), CEDIA, China
   Institution of acoustics, CLA-ACL, Czech Acoustical Society (2), Danish Acoustical Society (2), DEGA German Acoustic
   Soc Deutsche Gesellschaft für Akustik (18), DEIS, DPG, DPG German Physicists Soc., Dutch Acoustical Society/ Dutch
   Audiology Society, EAA (7), EAGE, EEE Ultrasonics, EFSUMB, EPS, European Acoustics Association, Ferroelectrics (2)
• FHKIOA, FIA (2), ICA, Finnish Acoustical Society, French Society of Acoustics SFA (5), Frequency Control Society UFFC
   (5), German Acoustics Society DEGA (4), Germany, hearing and speech related, Hearing Association (2), hearing
   pathology, Hellenic Institute of Acoustics, HKIOA (4), IEC TC 29, IEEE - JOE, IEEE (40), IEEE Ocean Engineering Society
   (3), IEEE Signal Processing Society (4), IEEE TUFFC (12) UFFC-S, IEEE Ultrasonics UFFC (2), IIAV (4), INCE Institute of
   Noise Control Engineering (61), INCE USA (11), INCE/Japan (2), Institute of Acoustics (UK) (27), Institute of Electrical
   and Electronics Engineers, Institute of Engineering Technology (UK), Institute of Noise Control Engineering of Japan,
   Institute of Physics, Institute of Nosie Control Engineering, International Bioacoustics Society, International Institute
   of Acoustics and Vibration IIAV (3), International Society for Neuroethology, International Society of Audiology.
• International Speech Communication Association, IOA, IPA international Phonetic Association (3), ISA, ISCA
   International Speech Communication Association (6), ISO/TC 43/SC 3, ISTU (2), ITG, ITRB AEP80, Japan Society of
   Acoustics, Japan society of Mechanical Engineering, Japanese acoustic association, JASA, KIVI (Royal Society of
   engineers in the Netherlands), KSNVE, LabPhon, Language (2), Laradi, Linguistic Society of America LSA (4), MDSPE,
   MHKIEIA, Midwest Society for Acoustic Ecology & World Listening Day, MIOA, Mts, NAG (Acoustical Society of the
   Netherlands), National Hearing Conservation Association (3), NCA, NCAC (15), New Zealand, Norwegian Acoustical
   Societies, NSPE, NZAS, OES, ÖGA, Physical Society, PMHKIQEP, Polish Acoustics Association, Psychonomic Society.
• Red Ecoacústica Colombia - REC, RSNA, SAE (10) Noise and Vibration, SEG (2), Seismological Society of America, SEM,
   SES, SFA (2), SGA/SSA (2), SMPTE (5), SOCHA, société française d'acoustique, Society Acoustics Singapore, Society for
   Marine Mammalogy, Society for Music Perception and Cognition., Society for Neuroscience SfN (3), Speech
   pathology, SPIE, SST, The Acoustical Society of Japan, The American Association of Physicists in Medicine (AAPM),
   the Belgian and Dutch Acoustical Societies, Turkish Acoustical Society, UIA, UK (3), UK Acoustic Network +, UK
   Institute of Acoustics (6), Ultrasonic Industry Association, USA ASJ, VDE-, VDT, VFS, Violin Society of America, Voice
   Foundation.

Other National/Global Association Memberships: Indicated by those with no preference
• AAAS (2), AAPG, AAPM, AAS (4), Acoustic Society of China, Acoustical Brazilian Society, Acoustical Society of
   Australia, Acoustical society of China, Acoustical Society of Japan (3), Acoustical society of Singapore, AES (17), AGU
   (4), AIUM (5), Alberta Acoustics, American Academy of Audiology, American Association of Physicists in Medicine
   AAPM, American Auditory Association, American Auditory Society (7), American Geophysical Union, American
   Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics AIAA (2), American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine AIUM, American
   Society for Nondestructive Testing (ASNT), American Speech Language Hearing Association ASHA (5), APS, ARO (4),
   ASHRAE, ASI Acoustical Society of India (2), ASJ Acoustical Society of Japan (3), ASME (4), ASNT, Association for
   Research in Otolaryngology ARO (7), Associazione Italiana di Acustica, ASTM (4), Audio Engineering Society (7),
   Australian Acoustical Society, Austrian Acoustics Association, Biophysical Society, British Society of Audiology (2).
• c ANS, Canadian Acoustical Association (7), Canadian Meteorological and Oceanographic Society, China, Czech
   Acoustic Society, Danish Acoustical Society DAS (3), DEGA Germany (8), DGA, DPG, Dutch Acoustical society (NAG)
   Audio Engineering Society (AES), EAA European Acoustics Society 10), EAGE, Edinburgh Mathematical Society (EMS).,
   EGU, Electric Field Sensing and Signatures (BAMS), European Acoustics Association, European Neuroscience Society,
    Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control Society, Finnish Acoustic Society, French Acoustics Society (SFA), French
    society of Acoustics, GAMM, German Acoustical Society, German Acoustical Society DEGA, German ENT Society.
•   German Society of Engineers VDI, HELINA, Hellenic Institute of Acoustics HELINA, Hellenic Society for Acoustic
    Ecology HSAE, HFES, HKIOA (4), IAVM, ICAD, ICC, IEEE (20), IEEE BMES, IEEE Oceanic Engineering Society (3), IEEE
    signal Processing Society (2), IEEE UFFC (2), IEEE Ultrasonics, IIAV (2), INCE (21), INCE USA (4), INCOSE, Institute of
    Acoustics (4), International Association of Forensic Phonetics and Acoustics, International Computer Music
    Association, International institute of Acoustics and Vibration, International Phonetics Association (2), International
    Quiet Ocean Experiment, International Speech Communication Association (3), IOA Institute of Acoustics UK (8), IOP,
    IPA (2), ISCA, ISTU, ITG, Korean acoustics society, LabPhon, Linguistic Society of America (2), Magnetics, Marine
    Acoustics Society of Japan, Military Sensing Symposia specialty Battlespace Acoustics, NAE, NAG, National Council of
    Acoustical Consultants NCAC (11), National Hearing Conservation Association, Nats, Nederlands Akoestisch
    Genootschap NAG, NHCA, Noise, Noise Control Engineering Institute of USA, Norwegian Acoustical Society, Pava.
•   Portuguese Society of Acoustics, Red Nacional de Laboratorios de Acústica (Argentina), Romanian Acoustic
    Association, SAE, SEA (Spain), SEG, Slovene Acustic Society, SMPTE, Sociedade Portuguesa de Acústica (SPA),
    Societas Linguistica Europaea, Societe Francaise d'Acoustique SFA (6), Society of Acoustics Singapore, Society of
    Automotive Engineers, Society of Experimental Mechanics, SPIE, SVTB, TAKDER, Thai Association of Acoustics and
    Vibration, Turkish Acoustical Society, UFFC, UK, UK Institute of Acoustics IOA (2), UK Institute of Physics, USITT, VDT,
    VI, Vibration Society, Voice Foundation (2), World Forum for Acoustic Ecology WFAE (2), Young Acousticians
    Network EAA.

Other National/Global Association Memberships: Those who regard ASA as primary professional affiliation
• AAAS (4), AAS, AAS (6), AAVI, ABAV, Acoustical Society of China (2), Acoustical Society of Denmark, Acoustical society
   of India, Acoustical Society of Japan (5), Acoustical Society of Korea (5), ADAA Asociacion de Acusticos Argentinos,
   AES, AHRI, AIAA (7), AIMBE (2), American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, American Auditory
   Society (10), American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, American Geophysical Union AGU (9),
   American Industrial Hygiene Association, American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine AIUM (7), American
   Otological Society, American Physical Society APS (5), American Psychological Society, American Speech-Language-
   Hearing Association (4), ANSI (2) ISO bodies on acoustics, Architectural Society of Japan, Argentina, ARO (16), ASEE.
• ASHA (11), ASHRA, ASHRAE (4), ASI, Asian Fisheries Acoustics Society, ASJ (2), ASME, ASME (16), ASNT, ASRAE,
   Association for Laboratory Phonology, Association for Research in Otolaryngology (10), ASTM (13) E33, AUA, Audio
   Engineering Society, Audio Engineering Society AES (45), Australian Acoustical Society (3), Avixa, BAAL, BME,
   Brazilian Acoustical Society, British Occupational Hygiene Association, British Society of Audiology, CAA Canadian
   Acoustical Org (15), California Academy of Audiology, Cognitive neuroscience society, Comparative Cognition
   Society, Danish Acoustical Society, DEGA Germany German Acoustical Society (7), Dutch Acoustic Society, Dutch
   Society of Medical Ultrasound, EAA European Acoustical (4) Technical Committee on Musical Acoustics, EFSUMB.
• EGU, European Acoustics Association (4), Experimental Psychology Society, Hellenic Institute of Acoustics, HKIOA (2),
   ICA, IEEE (64) JOE, IEEE Information Theory, IEEE Oceanic Engineering Society (15), IEEE signal processing society (3),
   IET, IIAV (4), IMA, INCE (55), INCE-USA (9), Indonesia Acoustic Vibration Association, Institute of Acoustics UK IOA
   (6), Institute of Noise Control Engineering (4), Int Congress on Ultrasound, International Congress of Infant Studies,
   International Institute of Acoustics and Vibration, International Phonetic Association (4), International Society for
   Neuroethology, International Society of Audiology, International Speech Communication Associate ISCA (2), IPA (4).
• ISCA (4), ISO (2), ISTU (2), Italian Acoustical Association (AIA), Japan, Korean Acoustical Society, Laboratory
   Phonology, Linguistic Society of America LSA (3), Marine Mammal Sciences, NAG, National Council of Acoustical
   Consultants (3), National Hearing Conservation Association (2), NCAA, NCAC (18), NCAX, NCVS, Netherlands
   Acoustical Society, Neurobiology of Language, Neurosciences, Norwegian Acoustical Society (2), Norwegian
   Association of Acousticians (Norsk Akustisk Selskap), Oceanography Society (2), OES, ONR, PAVA, ProAcustica
   (Brazil), Psychonometic Society, Psychonomics, SAE (5), Seismological Society of America, SEM, several similar
   international associations, SFA (3), SFN, Sigma Xi, SIL, SMPTE (2), Sobrac - Brazilian Acoustics Association, Society
   Acoustics Singapore, Society for Marine Mammalogy, Society for Neuroscience (3), Society of Marine Mammalogy
   (2), Society of Vibration and Acoustics Malaysia, Spain, SPIE (2), Swedish Acoustics Society, Taiwan, Taiwan Acoustics
   Association, TAKDER, Turk Akustik Dernegi, Turkish Acoustical Society, UK Institute of Acoustics (5), UKAN (2),
   Ultrasonics Society UFFC, Uruguay, USITT, VDI, Vibration Institute (2), Violin Association of America (2), Voice
   Foundation.
