     CLACKAMAS           COUNTY        BOARD      OF COUNTY          COMMISSIONERS
                           Sitting/Acting as:   Housing Authority Board
                               Policy Session Worksheet

Presentation Date: March 9, 2022      Approx. Start Time:    11AM    Approx. Length: 60 mins

Presentation Title: Housing Authority Public Housing Repositioning Plan

Department: Health, Housing and Human Services (H3S)/Housing Authority of Clackamas
County (HACC)

Presenters:   Devin Ellin, Zak deGorgue, Jim Brawner


WHAT ACTION ARE YOU REQUESTING FROM THE BOARD?
Staff is requesting general board approval to begin the repositioning of the Housing Authority of
Clackamas County’s remaining public housing portfolio in alignment with the recommendations
in the Public Housing Repositioning Study by Brawner Consulting. With this approval of the
overall strategy, staff will pursue the repositioning in stages, bringing back to the Housing
Authority Board detailed plans on specific properties for review and approval prior to any binding
action.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:

OVERVIEW:
Clackamas County has the oldest public housing in Oregon and among the oldest in the
country. The world of public housing is in transition. Public housing programs across the country
are struggling with aging housing stock requiring significant capital needs paired with continued
financial divestment from HUD.

HACC is responding by assessing its context, evaluating its assets, and considering the
investment strategies available to meet its mission and maintain financial sustainability. After
more than 60 years of operation, HACC is facing major challenges. These challenges include
maintaining and operating an aging public housing stock that relies solely on federal
appropriations and attempting to respond to an increased demand for affordable housing.

In recent years, HUD has made a variety of strategies available to housing authorities to
reposition their public housing developments. Repositioning moves families from a public
housing platform to rental assistance under HUD’s Section 8 program. These strategies enable
housing authorities to provide better-maintained units while creating opportunities to leverage
public and private resources, easing administration, and preserving affordable housing.

The passing of the 2018 Metro Affordable Housing Bond provides HACC with a unique
opportunity to utilize its existing public housing to leverage public and private resources to
substantially increase affordable housing opportunities in Clackamas County. As outlined in
Clackamas County’s Metro Bond Local Implementation Strategy, HACC set-aside half of its
bond revenues to reposition its public housing portfolio. HACC recently completed the
repositioning of Hillside Manor and is in the midst of repositioning Hillside Park. However, the
clock is ticking as all bond funds need to be disbursed by 2026.

Last year, HACC commissioned Brawner Consulting to develop recommendations for the
strategic repositioning of HACC’s remaining public housing portfolio with the goal of increasing
overall inventory of updated affordable housing options in the County that are financially viable
to maintain. The resulting Public Housing Repositioning Study is part of a proactive strategy to
align HACC operations to the realities of the HUD funding environment and advise HACC about
the repositioning strategies best-suited to its remaining public housing portfolio. This portfolio
includes HACC’s 145 unit scattered site portfolio and the two 100 unit public housing complexes
located in Oregon City, Clackamas Heights and Oregon City View Manor.

The Housing Authority’s primary and guiding goal throughout this repositioning effort is two-fold:
    1. We want to ensure HACC’s housing is safe, well-maintained, and financially sustainable
       to operate.
   2. We want to increase the number of affordable housing units in Clackamas County.

SCATTERED SITE PORTFOLIO:
HACC owns and operates 145 scattered site public housing units consisting primarily of 3 and
4-bedroom single-family homes. Given the inefficiencies inherent to maintaining single-family
properties spread over 250 square miles, paired with the increasing capital needs of this aging
housing stock, the cost of maintaining these homes is far outpacing what HUD is providing to
the Housing Authority. On average, maintaining and operating the scattered site portfolio costs
HACC approximately 23% more than it costs to operate Clackamas Heights or Oregon City
View Manor.

The continuation of the scattered sites as public housing is unsustainable. As recommended in
the repositioning study, HACC would apply to HUD to allow for the disposition of these units
through the Section 18 Scattered Site Disposition program. HUD approval would remove the
Public Housing Declaration of Trust, thereby allowing the Housing Authority to sell the
properties and provide the existing residents with Tenant Protection Vouchers and relocation
assistance.

For the past several years, HACC’s service providers have focused on enrolling residents in
HUD’s Family Self-Sufficiency (FSS) and Individual Development Account (IDA) programs.
These programs can help low income families acquire the capital and skills they need to secure
a mortgage and purchase a home. Whenever feasible, HACC will prioritize working with
qualified residents who are interested in purchasing a home through the repositioning process.

HACC has reached out to several first time home-buyer organizations who focus on creating
permanently affordable homeownership opportunities utilizing a land trust model. These
organizations expressed a keen interest in expanding their presence in Clackamas County.
They estimate that they will need between $60-100k of subsidy per unit in order to make the
homes affordable to households at either 80% AMI or 60% AMI and below. HACC sees a great
partnership opportunity to keep these family-sized, single family homes permanently affordable
under a land trust model by utilizing Metro bond funds to fill the funding gap. Metro has
expressed conceptual support for this idea.

There are a variety of disposition strategies and program structuring to consider for the
scattered sites. HACC has identified a consultant with extensive expertise in HUD repositioning,
community land trusts, and financial structuring who is willing to help HACC explore options and
develop a repositioning plan for the scattered site portfolio.

It is important to note that disposition proceeds are restricted for the following uses:
      ¢ Development or acquisition of Project Based Voucher units
      ¢« Rental Assistance Demonstration (RAD) transactions.
      ¢ Commercial uses (must service Public Housing residents, i.e. community center)
      ¢ Increasing the supply, availability, and utilization of Low-income Housing (i.e. HCV
         program improvements)
      ¢ Modernization and development of Public Housing
      ¢ Operation of Public Housing

Most critically, the approved uses specifically excludes unsubsidized development. For
example, a Housing Authority cannot use disposition proceeds on a Low-income Housing Tax
Credit transaction if it does not contain Public Housing or Section 8 subsidies. Proceeds may be
used if there is partial subsidy, but must meet HUD “Total Development Cost” thresholds for
proceeds per subsidized unit.

HACC plans to use proceeds from the sale of scattered site units to support the redevelopment
of Clackamas Heights and to support the development and/or acquisition of Project Based
Voucher units throughout the county, with a focus on supporting communities located outside of
the Metro urban growth boundary where funding is otherwise scarce.


CLACKAMAS HEIGHTS & OREGON CITY VIEW MANOR:
Like Hillside Park, Clackamas Heights was built in the early 1940’s and includes 100 units of
near obsolete, low-density public housing that has exceeded its useful life. Oregon City View
Manor is also 100 units of low-density public housing but it was constructed in 1962 and is in
better physical condition than Clackamas Heights.

HACC is considering a two-part repositioning plan for the two Oregon City projects, Clackamas
Heights and Oregon City View Manor (OCVM). Given the topography and proximity to services,
OCVM is more suitable to disposition and sale. Clackamas Heights is better suited for
redevelopment and, under a master plan, its current zoning supports a density increase that
would support the relocation of residents from OCVM plus additional units.

As recommended in the repositioning study, HACC would use the HUD repositioning program
known as the RAD/Section 18 Blend for Clackamas Heights. This is the same program HACC
used to renovate Hillside Manor and, notably, recent changes to the program have made it even
more advantageous for HACC to utilize this program to reposition Clackamas Heights.

For the redevelopment of Clackamas Heights, all 100 units would be demolished and the site
redeveloped with a minimum of 200 new units. Clackamas Heights is zoned R 3.5, which allows
for multifamily housing under a Master Planned Development. The density allows between 10
and 21 dwelling units per acre or roughly 250 — 336 units. This scenario is based off a
hypothetical disposition of OCVM and residents relocating permanently to the newly constructed
units at Clackamas Heights. This strategy would greatly minimize the displacement of residents
and reduce costs associated with relocation as residents would only need to move down the
street to a brand new unit.


NEXT STEPS:
If the Board supports the recommendations outlined in the repositioning study, HACC staff and
the consultant team will get started on developing a detailed strategy for the disposition of the
Scattered Site portfolio as a first priority. This will include working with Metro and local partners
that specialize in providing permanently affordable homeownership opportunities for first-time
homebuyers to identify which and how many units might be preserved and the details of the real
estate transaction and bond usage criteria.

Once potential disposition options have been identified, HACC staff will present them to the
Board for consideration. Once a feasible strategy has been determined and agreed upon,
HACC will start consulting with the local governments (cities) in which a portion of these units
are located to garner support for our plan. At this point, HACC staff would start consulting with
impacted residents and our Resident Advisory Board. HACC has been messaging about its
plans for repositioning and disposition for several years in order to prepare residents. Once
resident consultation and notification is complete, HACC would bring a resolution to the Board
seeking approval to submit the Section 18 disposition application to HUD. If HUD approves
HACC’s disposition application, HACC would likely phase resident relocation and unit
disposition over several years.
In concurrence with HACC’s work on the disposition of the scattered site portfolio, HACC would
embark on a master planning process for the redevelopment of Clackamas Heights. Similar to
the Hillside Redevelopment, and as recommended in the repositioning study, HACC desires to
redevelop the 16.43 acre site at increased density. Current zoning under a master plan
supports a density increase that would accommodate the relocation of residents from OCVM
and additional units.

As a first step, HACC desires to get started on the Master Planning process. This will involve
outreach to Oregon City officials and planning staff and an initial due diligence and feasibility
analysis. Once feasibility is determined, HACC would work on assembling a consultant team
and start the community and resident outreach process. Concurrently, HACC would get started
on assembling the pieces of the HUD repositioning application. As noted above, HACC intends
to utilize the RAD/Section 18 repositioning program that would allow disposition proceeds from
the scattered site portfolio to be used to fund the redevelopment of Clackamas Heights. This is
an important aspect of HACC’s repositioning strategy because the proceeds from public
housing dispositions are restricted to building or rehabilitating housing as project-based voucher
(PBV) housing or bringing existing housing under PBV. Based on Brawner’s financial analysis,
HACC could fully fund the redevelopment of Clackamas Heights and more than double the
number of affordable units without needing additional funding outside of scattered site
disposition proceeds, 4% LIHTC, and tax-exempt bond financing. All of which are non-
competitive, low-risk funding sources. The redevelopment of Clackamas Heights could be done
in phases which would limit the displacement of public housing residents during redevelopment.
In addition, it would provide HACC with relocation units and flexibility to consider a variety of
options to sell or reposition Oregon City View Manor.

FINANCIAL     IMPLICATIONS         (current year and ongoing):

This is funded through Metro Affordable Housing Bond Funds
Is this item in your current              LIYES            L] NO        XX] N/A

budget? What is the cost?      $    N/A           What is the funding source?     N/A

STRATEGIC PLAN ALIGNMENT:

   e    How does this item align with your Department's Strategic Business Plan goals?
           o  Sustainable and affordable housing
           o  Ensure safe, healthy and secure communities

   e    How does this item align with the County’s Performance Clackamas goals?
           o  These proposals align with the board priority of ensuring safe, healthy, and
              secure communities.


LEGAL/POLICY REQUIREMENTS:                N/A

PUBLIC/GOVERNMENTAL                PARTICIPATION:    N/A

OPTIONS:
   1. Approval to pursue the recommendations as outlined in the repositioning study
      understanding that all binding actions will be brought to the board for review and
      approval.
   2. Request revisions to the recommendations or timing of the repositioning plan.
   3. Request more information be provided before pursuing the recommendations outlined in
      the repositioning analysis.
    RECOMMENDATION:
    Staff recommends Option 1: Approval to pursue the recommendations as outlined in the
    repositioning study understanding that all binding actions will be brought to the board for review
    and approval.

    ATTACHMENTS:
    PowerPoint Presentation by Brawner Consulting
    Attachment A: Pages 9-10 from the Local Implementation Strategy regarding repositioning.

    SUBMITTED BY:
    Division Director/Head Approval
    Department Director/Head Approval          Eocziey, Cry
    County Administrator Approval

|           For information on this issue or copies of attachments, please contact Devin Ellin @ 971-227-0472
            HOUSING AUTHORITY OF
-\          CLACKAMAS COUNTY
|beat   .
            PORTFOLIO REVIEW
            February 2"? Board Meeting



                 \             (3)
                                     BRAWNER
                                     REAL-ESTATE DEVELOPMENT AND CONSULTING
    Brawner & Company Introduction —
= Brawner selected pursuant to RFP in March of last year —
=   We work primarily with PHAs in the Northwest
»   We bring added capacity to PHAs for development
»   Currently working on Hillside Park Section 18 application
=   Also working on a “Portfolio Review’ of other Public Housing   —
     = Scattered Sites (145 Units)
     » Clackamas Heights (100 Units)
     » Oregon City View Manor (100 Units)
Why PHA’s Are Converting Public
  =   HUD does not provide sufficient capital for backlog of needs ($26B)
  »   Older Public Housing projects in need of recapitalization
  »   Public Housing funding Is volatile on an annual basis
  »   section 8 funding is stable in comparison with support on “both sides of aisle
  =   Opportunity to increase annual subsidy from HUD without impact to residents
  »   Opportunity to leverage public/private partnerships and private debt/equity
  =   Opportunity to “divest” from HUD reliance and oversight, more local control
      Conversion options only recently available and continue to expand
               Recent HUD Changes
»   HUD has made significant changes to Public Housing
    repositioning after the 2017 OCVM board approval
    =   Changes translate into more flexibility for HACC
        Broader approval conditions
        Greater flexibility with proceeds

        Provides more local control
        Resident rights and options are expanded

        HUD's encouragement of PHA’s to “get out of Public Housing”
        Overall, more financially advantageous options
            Brawner Portfolio Revie\
»   The portfolio review will develop strategies with the following
    guiding principles:
     =»   Reduce burden of the Scattered Site Portfolio
            = Over $7k per unit in expenses excluding capital costs
            = Typical operating costs closer to $5k per unit
            » Over 35 miles between units

          Examine geographic effectiveness of Clackamas Heights and OCVM
          Analyze feasibility of redevelopment (on-site and off-site)
          Analyze feasibility of significant rehabilitation
          Create a financially feasible path that benefits residents and PHA
          Provide expedited options for immediate action
                    Initial Thoughts on Portfolio
 Perio              Lins     Popsnson |                               tion
                                                    Process underway
  Hillside Park        100    Redevelopment         Redevelopment per “Master Plan’
                                                ¢   Many PHA's disposing of SFH
  Scattered Sites      145      Disposition         Inefficient to operate
                                                ¢   Potential for homeownership

| Clackamas Heights    100
                             Redevelopment or
                             gi icant Rehab
                                                    Land is less valuable compared to other sites
                                                    Zoned for up to 358 units
                                                ¢   Site is ideally suited for SFH developer.
                       100      Disposition         Commanding views and high value land
                      Path to Zero” Public Hous


                                            Repositioning
            Portfolio     Proposed Action        Tool                 Use of Proceeds
                                                             Proceeds reinvested in Hillside Park
      Hillside Park       Redevelopment       section 18                         |
                                                                replacement housing project
                                                              Proceeds invested in Clackamas
      Scattered Sites        Disposition      section 18     Heights Redevelopment and other
                                                                 new Section 8 development
                                                             Proceeds utilized for offsite LIHTC
\J    Clackamas Heights   Redevelopment     RAD/Section 18
                                                                        development
                                                              Proceeds invested in Clackamas
‘|    Oregon City View
                             Disposition      section 18     Heights Redevelopment and other
 »)   Manor
                                                                 new Section 8 development
self Development vs For Profit Dev
    =»   HACC can self develop, or partner with for-profit developer
    =    Benefits of self development:
          » Proceeds from disposition remain in public trust
            HACC benefits from project-basing its own vouchers
            HACC remains as owner or lessor                            |
            Can form private/public partnerships to develop
            Balance sheet benefits from assets and operating revenue
            Provides cost center for agency
                 Recommendations                                    —
»   section 18 disposition of Scattered Site portfolio & OCVM
     » Proceeds to be used for Section 8 housing and services:
         =» Hillside Park/new PHA office

         » Clackamas Heights redevelopment

         = New Section 8 development outside of the UGB

»   Redevelopment of Clackamas Heights
    =   Develop Master Plan to maximize density (up to 358 units)
    »   Utilize RAD/Section 18 blend to leverage proceeds
    »   self develop and/or use turnkey developer to maintain ownership
                               Next Steps
»   PHA to develop policy goals for new development:
    =   Begin preliminary master planning process for Clackamas Heights
    =   Determine program for development outside of UGB

    =   Begin conversations with brokerage firms for scattered sites
    «   Create implementation plan and begin application process for Scattered Sites
       Attachment A:          Pages 9-10 of the Local Implementation Strategy


       funding release and therefore, HACC would instead consider a rolling process forr these
       types of developments.
       In all cases, any proposed use of bond resources will be reviewed first through HACC
       staff and then via the Housing Advisory Board (HAB) before any recommendation to the
       HACC board and Metro.

       An exception to this process is the Gladstone SRO affordable housing project which had
       been identified as a potential Bond funded project prior to the development of this LIS.
       This project is expected to be the first project to be funded with Housing Bond resources
       in Clackamas County and the reasons for being exempted from this selection process are
       detailed below.


       Phase 1 Project — The Gladstone SRO Affordable Housing site

       Consistent with Metro and Clackamas County’s hopes to demonstrate timely progress in
       Bond implementation, HACC has identified a Phase 1 Project. The project, located in
       Gladstone, is the re-development of an older special needs housing site that can provide
       up to 45 units. HACC will be the developer/owner of the project.

       The site is currently controlled by HACC and has been vacant for a number of years. It
       had previously been used as a nursing home and then a residential facility for youth. The
       site can be easily re-adapted, has good service spaces, is close to commercial services,
       transportation, and is affordable. The development of the Gladstone Single Room
       Occupancy (SRO) can fill a gap in the existing continuum of housing in Clackamas
       County by providing property for a singles population with deeply affordable rents and
       wrap around supportive services.

       HACC envisions the project will provide single room occupancy units to single adults. All
       of the units will have tenant rents at or below 30% AMI and will have project-based rent
       assistance. HACC is continuing to explore whether the project would be targeted to a
       specific sub-population or available to a range of income-qualified singles. HACC will
       explore the opportunity for partnerships with service providers who may have clientele
       needing housing and/or providers who may have valuable services to offer to residents.
       The space configuration allows the possibility of locating a medical clinic on site as well
       as on-site food preparation services available to residents.

       The bond funds in this project will be leveraged with 4% tax credits and the site is located
       in a qualified census tract, increasing the resources generated by the tax credits. Other
       leverage sources may include the Multifamily Energy Program (MEP), Permanent
       Supportive Housing (PSH) resources, and a permanent mortgage.

       Public Housing Re-Positioning

       The Housing Authority is working on master plans to re-position its existing public housing
       portfolio. There are currently three primary public housing sites—Hillside Park,
       Clackamas Heights, and Oregon City View Manor. Long-term plans for these sites may
       include possible sales of current land holdings associated with these sites, possible

HACC   Local Implementation Strategy, 2019                                              9 | Page
       purchases of adjacent sites and ultimately the re-development of the bulk of the existing
       300 units into new communities. These projects are some of the oldest public housing in
       Oregon. They have a number of problems including poor physical condition, poor use of
       land, poor locations and over concentration of lower income households. The Housing
       Authority’s goal is to embark on community-based input and planning exercises that
       result in well-built mixed-income communities with modern levels of density.

       The Housing Authority expects that the new master plans will result in substantially more
       units of affordable housing. Use of Bond funds to support this re-positioning effort is
       consistent with Metro requirements that Bond financing only be used for existing
       affordable housing sites that are part of the redevelopment of a residential property with
       existing public affordability restrictions, as long as the redevelopment results in a
       substantial net increase in the total number of affordable homes. In such cases, Bond
       funds may only be used for the portion of new homes that are not replacing regulated
       affordable homes currently on the site. HACC expects that it will use some portion of the
       Bond funds in these re-development projects. While the specific sites, the number of units
       and characteristics of those units are not set at this time, it is expected that the projects
       selected for Bond funding will emphasize large family and deeply affordable units.

       Should the Housing Authority identify public housing redevelopment sites under this
       Implementation Strategy, it will determine whether to develop/own the project themselves
       or to select a developer/owner; HACC anticipates acting as a developer on at least 300 of
       our public housing units. Should HACC decide to select a developer/owner it may use an
       RFQ, RFP, or sole source selection process.



       Sites Identified by Metro

       The allocation of Affordable Housing Bond funds includes an allocation for land
       acquisitions carried out by Metro rather than by the implementing jurisdictions. Metro has
       allocated an estimated $12 million for acquisition in Clackamas County. We will
       encourage Metro to purchase sites throughout the eligible boundaries in the county to
       further leverage our allocation of bond funds. HACC is committed to working closely with
       Metro should such sites be identified. When such sites are identified, HACC and Metro
       plan to select a developer/owner through a competitive process.


       Sites Proposed    by Developers

       The Housing Authority may accept unsolicited proposals from developers for projects to
       be funded under the Bond. Developers should be aware that, depending on progress
       against the Bond framework, such proposals may need to achieve specific targets for
       income levels, cost, unit types, geographic area, racial equity, accessibility, or other
       characteristics. Developer/owners are encouraged to work closely with HACC to ensure
       that their proposals are responsive to the evolving needs of HACC’s Implementation
       Strategy.


HACC   Local Implementation Strategy, 2019                                              10 | Page
