Table of Contents



OAR 410-120-0000: Acronyms and Definitions ....................cccccececeesecececscsccescsceeseecsseeeseeees 2

OAR 410-120-1210: Medical Assistance Benefit Packages and Delivery System ................... 52

OAR 410-120-2000: HRSN Services Delivery ................ccccccscscscscsecececscscscscesesesescseseesesesoees 56

OAR 410-141-3510: Provider Contracting and Credentialing....................c.cscescecscscecsceeeseees 90

OAR 410-141-3515: Network Adequacy ...............ccccecscsccccscscecscsesscecscscscsseseseececseseseeeeseees 95

OAR 410-141-3820: Covered Services ............. cc cececeeeecececececscecececececneecescsesesseeseeseeeeeeees 103

OAR 410-141-3920: Transportation: NEMT General Requirements ...................sesscsceeeeeees 107
OAR 410-120-0000: Acronyms and Definitions


Acronyms and Definitions


Identification of acronyms and definitions within this rule specifically pertain to their use within the
Oregon Health Authority (Authority), Health Systems Division (Division) administrative rules, applicable
to the medical assistance program. This rule does not include an exhaustive list of Division acronyms and
definitions. For more information, see Oregon Health Plan (OHP) program, (i) OAR 410-141-3500
Acronyms and Definitions, (ii) 410-200-0015 General Definitions, and (iii) any appropriate governing
acronyms and definitions in the Oregon Department of Human Services (Department) administrative
rules set found in chapters 411, 413, or 461 or contact the Division.


    (1)   “Abuse” means provider practices that are inconsistent with sound fiscal, business, or medical
          practices and result in an unnecessary cost to the Authority or in reimbursement for services
          that are not medically necessary or medically appropriate. It also includes recipient practices
          that result in unnecessary cost to the Authority.


    (2)   “Action” means a termination, suspension of, or reduction in covered benefits, services,
          eligibility or an increase in beneficiary liability. This includes a determination by a skilled
          nursing facility or nursing facility to transfer or discharge a resident, or an adverse
          determination with regard to the preadmission screening and resident review requirements.
          For the definition as it is related to a Coordinated Care Organization (CCO) member,        refer to
          OAR 410-141-3500.


    (3)   “Acupuncturist” means an individual licensed to practice acupuncture by the relevant state
          licensing board.


    (4)   “Acupuncture Services” means services provided by a licensed acupuncturist within the scope
          of practice as defined under state law.


    (5)   “Acute” means a condition, diagnosis, or illness with a sudden onset and that is of short
          duration.


    (6)   “Acquisition Cost” means, unless specified otherwise in individual program administrative
          rules, the net invoice price of the item, supply, or equipment plus any shipping or postage for
          the item.


    (7)   “Addictions and Mental Health Division” means the Division within the Authority’s Health
          Systems Division that administers mental health and addiction programs and services.
(8)    “Adequate Record Keeping” means documentation that supports the level of service billed.
       See OAR 410-120-1360, Requirements for Financial, Clinical, and Other Records, and the
       individual provider rules.


(9)    “Administrative Medical Examinations and Reports” means examinations, evaluations, and
       reports, including copies of medical records requested on the Oregon Health Plan (OHP) 729
       form through the local Department branch office or requested or approved by the Authority
       to establish client eligibility for a medical assistance program or for casework planning.


(10)   “Adults and Youths Discharged from an Institution for Mental Disease (IMD)” means Members
       who have been discharged from an IMD (as such term is defined in 42 CFR 435.1010) within
       the last 365 calendar days. Eligibility for HRSN Services shall expire on the 366th calendar day
       after discharge from an IMD.


(11)   “Adults and Youths Released from Incarceration” means Members released from
       incarceration within the past 365 calendar days, including those released from state and
       federal prisons, local correctional facilities, juvenile detention facilities, Oregon Youth
       Authority closed custody corrections
                                         or; tribal correctional facilities,     erimmigratiendetention
       facies. Eligibility for HRSN Services shall expire on the 366th calendar day after release from
       a carceral facility.


(12)   “Advance Directive” means an individual’s instructions to an appointed person specifying
       actions to take in the event that the individual is no longer able to make decisions due to
       illness or incapacity.


(13)   “Adverse determination” means a determination made that the individual does not require
       the level of services provided by a nursing facility or that the individual does or does not
       require specialized services.


(14)   “Adverse Event” means an undesirable and unintentional, though not necessarily unexpected,
       result of medical treatment.


(15)   “Affiliation” means for provider requesting enrollment or revalidation as an Oregon Medicaid
       provider any of the following:


         (a)   Five (5) percent or greater direct or indirect ownership interest that an individual or
               entity has in another organization;


         (b) A general or limited partnership interest (regardless of the percentage) that an
               individual or entity has in another organization;
         (c)   An interest in which an individual or entity exercises operational or managerial control
               over, or directly or indirectly conducts, the day-to-day operations of another
               organization, either under contract or through some other arrangement, regardless of
               whether or not the managing individual or entity is a W-2 employee of the organization;
               includes sole proprietorships;


         (d) An interest in which an individual is acting as an officer or director of a corporation; or


         (e) Any payment assignment relationship under 42 CFR 447.10(g).


(16)   “Agent” means any person who has been delegated the authority to obligate or act on behalf
       of a provider.


(17)   “Aging and People with Disabilities (APD)” means the division in the Department of Human
       Services (Department) that administers programs for seniors and people with disabilities. This
       division was formerly named “Seniors and People with Disabilities (SPD).”


(18)   “All-Inclusive Rate” or “Bundled Rate” means the nursing facility rate established for a facility.
       This rate includes all services, supplies, drugs, and equipment as described in OAR 411-070-
       0085 and in the Division’s Pharmaceutical Services program administrative rules and the
       Home    Enteral/Parenteral Nutrition and IV Services program administrative rules, except as
       specified in OAR 410-120-1340 Payment.


(19)   “Allied Agency” means local and regional governmental agency and regional authority that
       contracts with the Authority or Department to provide the delivery of services to covered
       individuals (e.g., local mental health authority, community mental health program, Oregon
       Youth Authority, Department of Corrections, local health departments, schools, education
       service districts, developmental disability service programs, Area Agencies on Aging (AAAs),
       and federally recognized American Indian tribes).


(20)   “Alternative Care Settings” means sites or groups of practitioners that provide care to
       members under contract with       a Managed Care Entity (MCE), including urgent care centers,
       hospice, birthing centers, out-placed medical teams in community or mobile health care
       facilities, long-term care facilities, and outpatient surgical centers.


(21)   “Ambulance” means a specially equipped and licensed vehicle for transporting sick or injured
       individuals that meets the licensing standards of the Authority or the licensing standards of
       the state in which the ambulance provider is located.


(22)   “Ambulatory Payment Classification” means a reimbursement method that categorizes
       outpatient visits into groups according to the clinical characteristics, the typical resource use,
       and the costs associated with the diagnoses and the procedures performed. The groups are
       called Ambulatory Payment Classifications (APCs).


(23)   “Ambulatory Surgical Center (ASC)” means a facility licensed as an ASC by the Authority.


(24)   “American Indian/Alaska Native (AIl/AN)” means a member of a federally recognized Indian
       tribe, band, or group, and an Eskimo or Aleut or other Alaska native enrolled by the Secretary
       of the Interior pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, 43 U.S.C. 1601, ora
       person who is considered by the Secretary of the Interior to be an Indian for any purpose.


(25)   “American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) Clinic” means a clinic recognized under Indian Health
       Services (IHS) law or by the Memorandum of Agreement between IHS and the Centers for
       Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).


(26)   “Ancillary Services” means services supportive of or necessary for providing a primary service,
       such as anesthesiology, which is an ancillary service necessary for a surgical procedure.


(27)   “Anesthesia Services” means administration of anesthetic agents to cause loss of sensation to
       the body or body part.


(28)   “Appeal” means a request for review of an adverse determination, action or as it relates to an
       MCE an adverse benefit determination.


(29)   “Area Agency on Aging (AAA)” means the designated entity with which the Department
       contracts to meet the requirements of the Older Americans Act and ORS Chapter 410 in
       planning and providing services to the elderly or elderly and disabled population.


(30)   “Asynchronous” means not simultaneous or concurrent in time. For the purpose of this
       general rule, asynchronous telecommunication technologies for telemedicine or telehealth
       services may include audio and video, audio without video, client or member portal and may
       include remote monitoring. “Asynchronous” does not include voice messages, facsimile,
       electronic mail or text messages.


(31)   “At Risk of Homelessness”
                                                       +5   means   a Member   who:
         (a)   Has an income that is 30% or less than the area median income where the individual
               resides according to Httes-/Awaabuduser covioortal/datasatc Hild        ncaa    imits 30.
               FY¥24-sdfthe most recent available data from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
               Development; and,
         (b)   Lacks sufficient resources or support networks to prevent homelessness; and,
         (c)   Meets any HRSN Housing and Nutrition Clinical Risk Factor.
844(32)       “Atypical Provider” means an entity able to enroll as a Billing Provider (BP) or rendering
        provider for medical assistance programs related non-health care services but that does not
        meet the definition of health care provider for National Provider Identification (NPI) purposes.


32}(33)       “Audiologist” means an individual licensed to practice audiology by the State Board of
        Examiners for Speech Pathology and Audiology.


33}(34)       “Audiology” means the application of principles, methods, and procedures of
        measurement, testing, appraisal, prediction, consultation, counseling, and instruction related
       to hearing and hearing impairment for the purpose of modifying communicative disorders
       involving speech, language, auditory function, including auditory training, speech reading and
        hearing aid evaluation, or other behavior related to hearing impairment.


{3.4}(35)     “Audio only” means the use of audio technology, permitting real-time communication
        between a health care provider and a member for the purpose of diagnosis, consultation or
       treatment. “Audio only” does not include health services that are customarily delivered by
       audio telephone technology and customarily not billed as separate services by a health care
        provider, such as the sharing of laboratory results.


35}(36)       “Automated Voice Response (AVR)” means a computer system that provides
       information on clients’ current eligibility status from the Division by computerized phone
        response.


36}(37)       “Behavioral Health” means mental health, mental illness, addiction disorders, and
       substance use disorders.


BA(38)        “Behavioral Health Assessment” means a qualified mental health professional’s
       determination of      a member’s need for mental health services.


88}(39)       “Behavioral Health Case Management” means services provided to members who need
       assistance to ensure access to mental health benefits and services from local, regional, or
       state allied agencies or other service providers.


{39}(40)      “Behavioral Health Evaluation” means a psychiatric or psychological assessment used to
       determine the need for mental health or substance use disorder services.


{40}(41)      “Benefit Package” means the package of covered health care services for which the
       client is eligible.
{44}(42)     “Billing Agent or Billing Service” means third party or organization that contracts with a
       provider to perform designated services in order to facilitate an Electronic Data Interchange
       (EDI) transaction on behalf of the provider.


{42}(43)     “Billing Provider (BP)” means an individual, agent, business, corporation, clinic, group,
       institution, or other entity who submits claims to or receives payment from the Division on
       behalf of a rendering provider and has been delegated the authority to obligate or act on
       behalf of the rendering provider.


{43}(44)     “Buying Up” means the practice of obtaining client payment in addition to the Division
       or managed care plan payment to obtain a non-covered service or item. (See OAR 410-120-
       1350 Buying Up.)


{44}(45)     “By Report (BR)" means services designated, as BR requires operative or clinical and
       other pertinent information to be submitted with the billing as a basis for payment
       determination. This information must include an adequate description of the nature and
       extent of need for the procedure. Information such as complexity of symptoms, final
       diagnosis, pertinent physical findings, diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, concurrent
       problems, and follow-up care shall facilitate evaluation.


{45}(46)     “Case Management Services” means services provided to ensure that CCO members
       obtain health services necessary to maintain physical, mental, and emotional development
       and oral health. Case management services include a comprehensive, ongoing assessment of
       medical, mental health, substance use disorder or dental needs plus the development and
       implementation of a plan to obtain or make referrals for needed medical, mental, chemical
       dependency, or dental services, referring members to community services and supports that
       may include referrals to Allied Agencies.


{46}(47)     "Center of Excellence (COE)" means a hospital, medical center, or other health care
       provider that meets or exceeds standards set by the agency for specific treatments or
       specialty care.


{47(48)      “Child Welfare (CW)” means a division within the Department responsible for
       administering child welfare programs, including child abuse investigations and intervention,
       foster care, adoptions, and child safety.


{48}(49)     “Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP)” means a federal and state funded portion
       of the Oregon Health Plan (OHP) established by Title XXI of the Social Security Act and
       administered by the Authority.
{49}(50)         “Chiropractor” means an individual licensed to practice chiropractic by the relevant
       state licensing board.


{50}(51)         “Chiropractic Services” means services provided by a licensed chiropractor within the
       scope of practice as defined under state law and federal regulation.


{544(52)         “Citizenship Waived Medical (CWM) Benefit Package” means the coverage and
       limitations defined in OAR 410-134-0005(2) for individuals who met the eligibility
       requirements in OAR 410-200-0240(1).            The CWM     Benefits Package ended on June 30, 2023.
       See OARs 410-134-0005 and 410-200-0240.


{52}(53)         “Citizenship Waived Medical Plus (CWX) Benefit Package” means coverage and
       limitations described in OAR 410-134-0005(2) for CWM             individuals who were pregnant or in
       their post-partum period and meet the eligibility requirements defined in OAR 410-200-
       0240(2). The CWM          Benefits Package which was previously referred to as "CWX", ended on
      June 20, 2023.          See OARs 410-134-0005 and 410-200-0240.


{53}(54)         “Claimant” means an individual who has requested a hearing.


{54}(55)         “Client” means an individual found eligible to receive OHP health services.


{55}(56)         “Climate-Related Supports” means climate-related devices and services provided to
       HRSN Eligible Members in their own home or non-institutional, non-congregate primary
       residence and for whom such equipment and support are Clinically Appropriate as a
       component of health services treatment or prevention. HRSN Eligible Members are eligible for
       new climate-related devices of the same type            only every thirty-six (36) months, provided the
       member       has a demonstrated need and the MCE or the Authority conducts a re-screening and
       determines they are eligible for HRSN Climate Related Supports.


           (a)   Clinically Appropriate climate-related devices for Member homes, non-institutional,
                 non-congregate primary residence include:


                       (i)    Air conditioners for individuals at health risk due to significant heat;


                       (ii)   Heaters for individuals at increased health risk due to significant cold;


                       (iii) Air filtration devices and, as needed, replacement air filters for individuals at
                              health risk due to compromised air quality;


                       (iv) Mini refrigeration units as needed for individuals for medication storage; and
                           (v)   Portable power supplies (PPSs) for individuals who need access to electricity-
                                 dependent equipment (e.g., ventilators, dialysis machines, intravenous
                                 equipment, chair lifts, mobility devices, communication devices, etc.) or are at
                                 risk of public safety power shutoffs (2SPS}that may compromise their ability
                                 to use medically necessary devices.


             (b)    Climate-Related Support services include, as may be needed by the Member, the
                    provision and service delivery, and, as needed, installation of the climate-related devices
                    identified above and device maintenance.      Foerai~conditionersClimate-Related
                                                                                               Suspert
                    sopmces
                    shallalseinelodcnstateticriasaceddedby+hetiersser,                    Ensuring safe
                    utilization may also include an attestation from the member that they can safely and
                    legally install the device in their primary, non-institutional, non-congregate place of
                    residence.


{56}(57)            “Clinical Nurse Specialist” means a registered nurse who has been approved and
       certified by the Board of Nursing to provide health care in an expanded specialty role.


{SA(58)             “Clinical Social Worker” means an individual licensed to practice clinical social work
       pursuant to state law.


{58}(59)            “Clinical Record” means the medical, dental, or mental health records of a client or
       member.


{59}(60)            “Clinically Appropriate” means having at least one HRSN Clinical Risk Factor and at least
       one HRSN Social Risk Factor, each of which must be applicable to the HRSN Service for which
       the Member is authorized. For example, to determine if a Member should be authorized to
       receive Climate-Related Supports, the member must, in addition to belonging to an HRSN
       Covered Population, have at least one HRSN CimateDewiee-Clinical Risk Factor and one HRSN
      ClimateDewice-Social Risk Factor. HRSN Services are not Clinically Appropriate if they are
       solely for the convenience or preference of the Member.


{60}(61)            “Closed Loop Referral” means the process of exchanging information between and
       among an MCE, the Oregon Health Authority (which may include its Fee For Service (FFS)
       Program),          a Member,    HRSN Service Providers, HRSN Connectors, and other similar
       organizations, to make referrals and communicate about the status of referrals and services
       for         a Member.


{64}(62)            “Comfort Care” means medical services or items that give comfort or pain relief to an
       individual who has a terminal illness, including the combination of medical and related
       services designed to make it possible for an individual with terminal illness to die with dignity
       and respect and with as much comfort as is possible given the nature of the illness.
{62}(63)         “Community Health Worker” means an individual who:


           (a)   Has expertise or experience in public health;


           (b)   Works in an urban or rural community either for pay or as a volunteer in association
                 with a local health care system;


           (c)   To the extent practicable, shares ethnicity, language, socioeconomic status, and life
                 experiences with the residents of the community where the worker serves;


           (d) Assists members of the community to improve their health and increases the capacity of
                 the community to meet the health care needs of its residents and achieve wellness;


           (e)   Advocates for the individual patient and community health needs, building individual
                 and community capacity to advocate for their health;


           (f)   Provides health education and information that is culturally appropriate to the
                 individuals being served;


           (g)   Assists community residents in receiving the care they require;


           (h)   May give peer counseling and guidance on health behaviors; and


           (i)   May provide direct services such as first aid or blood pressure screening.


{63}(64)         “Community Information Exchange” and “CIE” each means a software
      applcatieatechnology system +hatis-utilized by a network of collaborative partners using
      technelesysystems-to exchange information for the purpose of connecting individuals to the
       services and supports they need. CIE functionality must include Closed Loop Referrals, a
       shared resource directory, and documentation of consent to the use of technology by the
       Member or other individual being connected to services.


{64}(65)         “Community Mental Health Program (CMHP)” means the organization of all services for
       individuals with mental or emotional disorders operated by, or contractually affiliated with, a
       local Mental Health Authority operated in a specific geographic area of the state under an
       intergovernmental agreement or direct contract with the Authority.


{65}(66)         “Community Partner” means an individual affiliated with an organization contracted,
       trained, and certified by the Oregon Health Authority’s Community Partner Outreach Program
       to provide free assistance to people applying for health coverage in Oregon that includes but
       is not limited to:


                                                                                                         10
           (a)   Helping with health coverage application;


           (b) Helping with enrolling in health insurance plans;


           (c)   Assisting with health coverage renewal assistance;


           (d)   Helping with Healthcare System Navigation defined in OAR 410-120-0000; and


           (e)   Outreach and engagement related to subsections (a) through (d) of this rule.


{66}(67)         “Co-morbid Condition” means a medical condition or diagnosis coexisting with one or
       more other current and existing conditions or diagnoses in the same patient.


{67)(68)         “Condition/Treatment Pair” means diagnoses described in the International
       Classification of Diseases Clinical Modifications, 10th edition (ICD-10-CM); the Diagnostic and
       Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition (DSM-5; and treatments described in the
       Current Procedural Terminology (CPT); or American Dental Association Codes (CDT) or the
       Authority Behavioral Health Fee Schedule, that, when paired by the Health Evidence Review
       Commission (HERC), constitute the line items in the Prioritized List of Health Services.
       Condition/treatment pairs may contain many diagnoses and treatments.


{68}(69)         “Contested Case Hearing” means a proceeding before the Authority under the
       Administrative Procedures Act when any of the following contests an adverse determination,
       action, or as it relates to an MCE enrollee, an adverse benefit determination:


           (a)   Aclient or member or their representative;


           (b) A member of an MCE after resolution of the MCE’s appeal process;


           (c)   An MCE member’s provider; or


           (d) An MCE.

{69}(70)         “Contiguous Area” means the area up to 75 miles outside the border of the State of
       Oregon.


{70}(71)         “Contiguous Area Provider” means a provider practicing in a contiguous area.


73472)           “Continuing Treatment Benefit” means a benefit for clients who meet criteria for having
       services covered that were either in a course of treatment or scheduled for treatment the day




                                                                                                         11
       immediately before the date the client’s benefit package changed to one that does not cover
       the treatment.


(72473)          “Coordinated Care Organization (CCO)” has the meaning given that term in OAR 410-
       141-3500(21).


73}(74)          “Co-Payments”      means the portion of a claim or medical, dental, or pharmaceutical
       expense that a client must pay out of their own pocket to a provider or a facility for each
       service. It is usually a fixed amount that is paid at the time service is rendered.


{74}(75)         “Cost Effective” means the lowest cost health service or item that, in the judgment of
       Authority staff or its contracted agencies, meets the medical needs of the client.


{75}(76)         “Cover All Kids (CAK)” meaning defined in OAR 410-200-0015.


76}(77)          “Covered Services” means medically necessary and appropriate health services and
       items described in ORS Chapter 414 and applicable administrative rules. Covered services
       include:


           (a) Services described in the Prioritized List of Health Services above the funding line set by
                 the legislature;


           (b)   Ancillary Services OAR 410-120-0000 (22);


           (c)   Diagnostic Services OAR 410-120-0000 (82);


           (d) Services necessary for compliance with the requirements for parity in mental health and
                 substance use disorder benefits in Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 42 CFR part 438,
                 subpart k; and


           (e) Services necessary for compliance with the requirements for Early and Periodic
                 Screening, Diagnostic and Treatment (EPSDT) as described in chapter 410 Division 151.


A(78)            “Current Dental Terminology (CDT)” means a listing of descriptive terms identifying
       dental procedure codes used by the American Dental Association.


78}(79)          “Current Procedural Terminology (CPT)” means a medical code set developed by the
       American Medical Association used to report medical, surgical, and diagnostic procedures and
       services performed by physicians and other health care providers.




                                                                                                          12
{79}(80)      “Credible Allegation of Fraud” means an allegation for fraud, which has been verified by
       the Authority or delegate, from any source, including but not limited to: fraud hotline
       complaints, claims data mining, and patterns identified through provider audits, civil false
       claims cases, and law enforcement investigations. Allegations are considered to be credible
       when they have the indicia of reliability and the Agency has reviewed all allegations, facts and
       evidence carefully and acts judiciously on a case-by-case basis.


{80}(81)      “Date of Receipt of a Claim” means the date on which the Authority receives a claim as
       indicated by the Internal Control Number (ICN) assigned to a claim. Date of receipt is shown as
       the Julian date in the 5th through 7th position of the ICN.


{84}(82)      “Date of Service” means the date on which the client receives medical services or items,
       unless otherwise specified in the appropriate provider rules. For items that are mailed or
       shipped by the provider, the date of service is the date on which the order was received, the
       date on which the item was fabricated, or the date on which the item was mailed or shipped.


{82}(83)      “Deactivation” means an action prohibiting a provider’s participation where the
       Authority assigned provider number is terminated as the result of inactivity, as evidenced by
       failure to submit claims for eighteen (18) months, or relocation, as evidenced by
       returned/undeliverable mail by the United States Postal Service or any other mail carrier.


{83}(84)      “Declaration for Mental Health Treatment” means a written statement of an individual’s
       decisions concerning their mental health treatment. The individual makes the declaration
       when they are able to understand and make decisions related to treatment that is honored
       when the individual is unable to make such decisions.


{84}(85)      “Dental Emergency Services” means dental services provided for severe tooth pain,
       unusual swelling of the face or gums, or an avulsed tooth.


£85}(86)      “Dental Therapist” means a person licensed to practice dental therapy within the scope
       of practice as defined under state law.


{86}(87)      “Dentist” means an individual licensed to practice dentistry pursuant to state law of the
       state in which they practice dentistry or an individual licensed to practice dentistry pursuant
       to federal law for the purpose of practicing dentistry as an employee of the federal
       government.


{87(88)       “Denturist” means an individual licensed to practice denture technology pursuant to
       state law.




                                                                                                         13
{88}(89)         “Denturist Services” means services provided within the scope of practice as defined
       under state law by or under the personal supervision of a denturist.


£89}(90)         “Dental Hygienist” means an individual licensed to practice hygiene under the direction
       of a licensed professional within the scope of practice pursuant to state law.


{90}(91)         “Dental Hygienist with an Expanded Practice Permit” means an individual licensed to
       practice dental hygiene services as authorized by the Board of Dentistry with an Expanded
       Practice Dental Hygienist Permit (EPDHP) pursuant to state law.


{94}(92)         “Dentally Appropriate”


           (a)   means dental services, items or dental supplies that are:


                       (i)   Recommended by a licensed health provider practicing within the scope of
                             their license; and


                       (ii) Safe, effective and appropriate for the patient based on standards of good
                             dental practice and generally recognized by the relevant scientific or
                             professional community based on the best available evidence; and


                       (iii) Not solely for the convenience or preference of an OHP client, member or a
                             provider of the service, item or dental supply; and


                       (iv) The most cost effective of the alternative levels or types of health services,
                             items or supplies that are covered services that can be safely and effectively
                             provided to a client or member in the Division or MCE’s judgement.


           (b)   All covered services must be dentally appropriate for the member or client but not all
                 medically appropriate services are covered services.


           (c)   For Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and Treatment (EPSDT), see chapter 410,
                 Division 151.


{92}(93)         “Oregon Department of Human Services (Department or ODHS)” means the agency
       established in ORS Chapter 409, including such divisions, programs and offices as may be
       established therein.


{93}(94)         “Department Representative” means an individual who represents the Department and
       presents the Department’s position in a hearing.




                                                                                                              14
{94}(95)       “Diagnosis Code” means as identified in the International Classification of Diseases, 10th
       revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM). The primary diagnosis code is shown in    all billing
       claims, unless specifically excluded in individual provider rules. Where they exist, diagnosis
       codes shall be shown to the degree of specificity outlined in OAR 410-120-1280, Billing.


{95}(96)       “Diagnosis Related Group (DRG)” means a system of classification of diagnoses and
       procedures based on the ICD-10-CM.


{96}(97)       “Diagnostic Services” mean those services required to diagnose a condition, including
       but not limited to: radiology, ultrasound, other diagnostic imaging, electrocardiograms,
       laboratory and pathology examinations, and physician or other professional diagnostic or
       evaluative services.


{974(98)       “Dietitian” means an individual licensed by the Board of Licensed Dietitians to provide
       nutrition services as outlined in the Standards of Practice in the OR Administrative Rules,
       Chapter 834, Division 60 (OAR 834-060-0000).


{98}(99)       “Division” means the Health Systems Division within the Authority. The Division is
       responsible for coordinating the medical assistance programs within the State of Oregon
       including the Oregon Health Plan (OHP) Medicaid demonstration, the State Children's Health
       Insurance Program (SCHIP-Title XXI), and several other programs.


{99\(100)     _ “Durable Medical Equipment, Prosthetics, Orthotics and Medical Supplies (DMEPOS)”
       means equipment that can stand repeated use and is primarily and customarily used to serve
       a medical purpose. Examples include wheelchairs, respirators, crutches, and custom-built
       orthopedic braces. Medical supplies are non-reusable items used in the treatment of illness or
       injury. Examples of medical supplies include diapers, syringes, gauze bandages, and tubing.


4400}(101)     “Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and Treatment (EPSDT)” means the program
       requiring specific coverage for children and young adults, as described in chapter 410 Division
       151.


44044(102)     “Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)” means the exchange of business documents from
       application to application in a federally mandated format or, if no federal standard has been
       promulgated, using bulk transmission processes and other formats as the Authority designates
       for EDI transactions. For purposes of rules OAR 943-120-0100 through OAR 943-120-0200, EDI
       does not include electronic transmission by web portal.


{4024(103)     “EDI Submitter” means an individual or an entity authorized to establish an electronic
       media connection with the Authority to conduct an EDI transaction. An EDI submitter may be
       a trading partner or an agent of a trading partner.


                                                                                                            15
4403+(104)   “Electronic Verification System (EVS)” means eligibility information that has met the
      legal and technical specifications of the Authority in order to offer eligibility information to
      enrolled providers of the Division.


4404}(105)   “Emergency Department” means the part of a licensed hospital facility open 24 hours a
      day to provide care for anyone in need of emergency treatment.


4405}(106)   “Emergency Health Benefit Funding” means funding for the health benefits defined in
      410-134-0004(2)(a-j), included in the Healthier Oregon benefits package that is in part funded
      with state funding and matched with federal funds (42 CFR 440.255).


4406}(107)   “Emergency Medical Condition” means a medical condition, whether physical, dental, or
      behavioral, manifesting itself by acute symptoms of sufficient severity such that a prudent
      layperson who possesses an average knowledge of health and medicine could reasonably
      expect the absence of immediate medical attention to result in placing the health of the
      individual (or with respect to the pregnant person, the health of the person or their
      pregnancy) in serious jeopardy, serious impairment to bodily functions or serious dysfunction
      of any bodily organ or part. An emergency medical condition is not based on the final
      diagnosis but is based on presenting symptoms as perceived by a prudent layperson and
      includes cases in which the absence of immediate medical attention would not in fact have
      had the adverse results described in the previous sentence.


4407(108)    “Emergency Medical Transportation” means transportation necessary for a client with
      an emergency medical condition as defined in this rule and requires a skilled medical
      professional such as an Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) and immediate transport to a
      site, usually a hospital, where appropriate emergency medical service is available.


4408}(109)   “Emergency Services” means health services from a qualified provider necessary to
      evaluate or stabilize an emergency medical condition, including inpatient and outpatient
      treatment that may be necessary to assure within reasonable medical probability that the
      patient’s condition is not likely to materially deteriorate from or during a client’s discharge
      from a facility or transfer to another facility.


4409}(110)   “Evidence-Based Medicine” means the conscientious, explicit, and judicious use of
      current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients. The practice
      of evidence-based medicine means integrating individual clinical expertise with the best
      available external clinical evidence from systematic research. By individual clinical expertise
      we mean the proficiency and judgment that individual clinicians acquire through clinical
      experience and clinical practice. Increased expertise is reflected in many ways, but especially
      in more effective and efficient diagnosis and in the more thoughtful identification and
      compassionate evaluation of individual patients' predicaments, rights, and preferences in


                                                                                                         16
      making clinical decisions about their care. By best available external clinical evidence we mean
      clinically relevant research, often from the basic sciences of medicine, but especially from
      patient-centered clinical research into the accuracy and precision of diagnostic tests (including
      the clinical examination), the power of prognostic markers, and the efficacy and safety of
      therapeutic, rehabilitative, and preventive regimens. External clinical evidence both
      invalidates previously accepted diagnostic tests and treatments and replaces them with new
      ones that are more powerful, more accurate, more efficacious, and safer. (Source: BMJ 1996;
      312:71-72 (13 January)). In addition, Evidence-Based Medicine considers the quality of
      evidence and the confidence that may be placed in findings.


4440}(111)    “False Claim” means a claim that a provider knowingly submits or causes to be
      submitted that contains inaccurate, misleading, or omitted information and such inaccurate,
      misleading, or omitted information may result, or has resulted, in an overpayment.


44444(112)    “Family Planning Services” means services for clients of child bearing age (including
      minors who can be considered to be sexually active) who desire such services and that are
      intended to prevent pregnancy or otherwise limit family size.


{4424(113)    "Federally Supported Hemophilia Treatment Center" means a hemophilia treatment
      center (HTC) that:


        (a) Receives funding from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Maternal
              and Child Health Bureau National Hemophilia Program;


        (b)   Is qualified to participate in 340B discount purchasing as an HTC;


        (c) Actively participates in the U.S. Center for Disease Control (CDC) and Prevention
              surveillance and has an identification number that is listed in the HTC directory on the
              CDC website;


        (d)   Is recognized by the Federal Regional Hemophilia Network that includes the State of
              Oregon; and


              ls a direct care provider offering comprehensive hemophilia care consistent with
              treatment recommendations set by the Medical and Scientific Advisory Council (MASAC)
              of the National Hemophilia Foundation in their standards and criteria for the care of
              persons with congenital bleeding disorders.


{443}(114)    “Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC)” means a federal designation for a medical
      entity that receives grants under Section 329, 330, or 340 of the Public Health Service Act ora




                                                                                                         17
      facility designated as an FQHC by Centers for Medicare and Medicaid (CMS) upon
      recommendation of the U.S. Public Health Service.


444\(115)    “Fee-for-Service Provider” means a health care provider who is not reimbursed under
      the terms of an Authority contract with a Coordinated Care Organization or Prepaid Health
      Plan (PHP). A medical provider participating in a PHP or a CCO may be considered a fee-for-
      service provider when treating clients who are not enrolled in a PHP or a CCO.


4445}(116)   “For Cause Termination” means a mandatory or discretionary termination by the
      Authority as is outlined in OAR 410-120-1400.


4446}(117)   “Fraud” means an intentional deception or misrepresentation made by an individual
      with the knowledge that the deception may result in some unauthorized benefit to him or
      some other person. It includes any act that constitutes fraud under applicable federal or state
      law.


444-4118)    “Fully Dual Eligible” means for the purposes of Medicare Part D coverage (42 CFR
      423.772), Medicare clients who are also eligible for Medicaid, meeting the income and other
      eligibility criteria adopted by the Authority for full medical assistance coverage.


4448}(119)   “General Assistance (GA)” means medical assistance administered and funded 100
      percent with State of Oregon funds through OHP.


4449}(120)   “Grievance” means an expression of dissatisfaction about any matter other than an
      adverse benefit determination. Grievances may include, but are not limited to, the quality of
      care or services provided, and aspects of interpersonal relationships such as rudeness of a
      provider or employee, or failure to respect the enrollee’s rights regardless of whether
      remedial action is requested.


4420}(121)   “Health Care Interpreter” Certified or Qualified have the meaning given those terms in
      ORS 413.550.


(4244(122)   “Health Care Professionals” means individuals with current and appropriate licensure,
      certification, or accreditation in a medical, mental health, or dental profession who provide
      health services, assessments, and screenings for clients within their scope of practice,
      licensure, or certification.


{4224(123)   “Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS)” means a method for reporting
      health care professional services, procedures, and supplies. HCPCS consists of the Level | —
      American Medical Association's Physician's Current Procedural Terminology (CPT), Level Il —
      National codes, and Level IIl — Local codes. The Division uses HCPCS codes; however, the


                                                                                                      18
      Division uses current Dental Terminology (DT) codes for the reporting of dental care services
      and procedures.


4423}(124)    “Healthcare System Navigation” means the process by which        a Community Partner
      supports individuals who are in need of health care by:


        (a) Assisting with application for or renewal of Oregon Health Plan (OHP);


        (b) Assisting with the management of the application process for OHP;


        (c)   Assisting with accessing available benefits;


        (d)   Identifying and removing barriers to care;


        (e)   Providing the information needed to build the knowledge and confidence necessary for
              utilizing benefits; or


        (f)   Promoting the establishment of healthcare services and continuity of care.


44244(125)    “Health Evidence Review Commission”       means a commission that, among other duties,
      develops and maintains a list of health services ranked by priority from the most to the least
      important representing the comparative benefits of each service to the population served.


4425}(126)    “Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA)” means the federal
      law (Public Law 104-191, August 21, 1996) with the legislative objective to assure health
      insurance portability, reduce health care fraud and abuse, enforce standards for health
      information, and guarantee security and privacy of health information.


4426}(127)    “Health Maintenance Organization (HMO)” means a public or private health care
      organization that is a federally qualified HMO under Section 1310 of the U.S. Public Health
      Services Act. HMOs      provide health care services on a capitated, contractual basis.


44274(128)    “Health Plan New/non-categorical client (HPN)” means an individual who is 19 years of
      age or older, is not pregnant, is not receiving Medicaid through another program, and who
      must meet all eligibility requirements to become an OHP client.


4428}(129)    “Healthier Oregon” means the medical assistance benefit package that is equal to the
      OHP Plus benefit package defined in OAR 410-120-1210. The Healthier Oregon is for
      individuals;




                                                                                                       19
        (a)    Who do not meet the citizenship and non-citizen status requirements defined in OAR
               410-200-0215 and 461-120-0110; and


        (b) Who do meet the financial and other non-financial eligibility requirements for a Health
               Systems Division (HSD) Medical Program (see OAR Chapter 410 Division 200) or an
               Oregon Supplemental Income Program Medical (OSIPM) Program (see OAR Chapter
               461).

4429}(130)     “Health-Related Social Needs” and “HRSN” each means the unmet climate, housing,
      nutrition, and outreach and engagement-related social needs, the-aametclmate+relatedsecial
        eeds_including     theserelated te an individual’s   ,
                                                                 housing   nutrition, and environmen   that
      contribute to an individual’s poor health and are a result of underlying social and structural
      determinants of health.


4430}(131)     “Hearing Aid Dealer” means an individual licensed by the Board of Hearing Aid Dealers
      to sell, lease, or rent hearing aids in conjunction with the evaluation or measurement of
      human      hearing and the recommendation, selection, or adaptation of hearing aids.


4344(132)      “Home Enteral Nutrition” means services provided in the client's place of residence to
      an individual who requires nutrition supplied by tube into the gastrointestinal tract as
      described in the Home Enteral/Parenteral Nutrition and IV Services program provider rules.


4432}(133)     “Home   Health Agency” means a public or private agency or organization that has been
      certified by Medicare as a Medicare home health agency and that is licensed by the Authority
      as a home health agency in Oregon and meets the capitalization requirements as outlined in
      the Balanced Budget Act (BBA) of 1997.


4433}(134)     “Home   Health Services” means part-time or intermittent skilled nursing services, other
      therapeutic services (physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy), and home
      health aide services made available on a visiting basis in a place of residence used as the
      client's home.


44344(135)     “Home   Intravenous Services” means services provided in the client's place of residence
      to an individual who requires that medication (antibiotics, analgesics, chemotherapy,
      hydrational fluids, or other intravenous medications) be administered intravenously as
      described in the Home Enteral/Parenteral Nutrition and IV Services program administrative
      rules.


4435}(136)     “Home   Parenteral Nutrition” means services provided in the client's residence to an
      individual who is unable to absorb nutrients via the gastrointestinal tract, or for other medical




                                                                                                              20
      reasons, requires nutrition be supplied parenterally as described in the Home
      Enteral/Parenteral Nutrition and IV Services program administrative rules.


{436}(137)    “Hospice” means a public agency or private organization or subdivision of either that is
      primarily engaged in providing care to terminally ill individuals and is certified by the federal
      Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services as a program of hospice services meeting current
      standards for Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement and Medicare Conditions of
      Participation and is currently licensed by the Oregon Health Authority, Public Health Division.


44344(138)    “Hospital” means a facility licensed by the Public Health Division as a general hospital
      that meets requirements for participation in OHP under Title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
      The Division does not consider facilities certified by CMS as religious non-medical facilities as
      hospitals for reimbursement purposes. Out-of-state hospitals shall be considered hospitals for
      reimbursement purposes if they are licensed as a short-term acute care or general hospital by
      the appropriate licensing authority within that state and if they are enrolled as a provider of
      hospital services with the Medicaid agency within that state.


4438}(139)    “Hospital-Based Professional Services” means professional services provided by licensed
      practitioners or staff based on a contractual or employee/employer relationship and reported
      as a cost on the Hospital Statement of Reasonable Cost report for Medicare and the
      Calculation of Reasonable Cost (DMAP 42) report for the Division.


4439}(140)    “Hospital Dentistry” means dental services normally done in a dental office setting, but
      due to specific client need (as detailed in OAR chapter 410 division 123) are provided in an
      ambulatory surgical center or inpatient or outpatient hospital setting under general
      anesthesia (or IV conscious sedation, if appropriate).


(141) “Hospital Laboratory” means a laboratory providing professional technical laboratory services
      as outlined under laboratory services in a hospital setting as either an inpatient or outpatient
      hospital service whose costs are reported on the hospital’s cost report to Medicare and to the
      Division.


(142) “Housing Related Supports” means housing services provided to eligible members to help
      them maintain healthy and safe housing (as detailed in OAR 410-120-2000). Housing Related
      Supports include:
        (a)   Rent and Utility Costs
        (b) Hotel/Motel Stays
        (c)   Utilities Arrears
        (d) Utilities Set Up
        (e)   Storage Fees
        (f)   Tenancy Services (paid via 15-minute increments)
        (g)   Tenancy Services (paid per member per month)


                                                                                                          21
        (h)      Home   Modifications
        fa}(i)           Home Remediations


4.46\-“HRSN Climate Device Clinical Risk Factor” means any one of the climate device-specific
      clinical risk factors detailed in in Table 1 below.- mMeans-anyenetheclimatedevice-specific
      eliatealtisk tacters-cdetatedts the-ChsS eopreved HRSN services protecel




44424(143)       “HRSN Clinical Risk Factor” is the generic term for any one, or combination, or botha} of
      the following. All HRSN Clinical Risk Factors are listed in Table 1 and Table 2 below:


        (a)      HRSN Climate Device and Outreach and Engagement Clinical Risk Factor;


        (b) HRSN Housing ,aac-Nutrition and Outreach and Engagement Clinical Risk Factor;

        /e)_HRSN            Nutrition   Clinical   RiskF   .


{443}(144)       “HRSN Connector” means any person or entity, including HRSN Service Providers and
      other similar social service organizations, that assists Members in documenting the
      information necessary to make an HRSN Request to an MCE for an HRSN Eligibility Screening
      and HRSN Service authorization.


{444\(145)       “HRSN Covered Populations” means Members. except for individuals receiving the BRG
      service package defined in OAR 410-135-0030,who belong to one or more of the following
      populations, as further specified in the HRSN Guidance Document:


        (a) Adults and Youth Discharged from an Institution for Mental Diseases (IMD);


        (b)      Adults and Youth Released from Incarceration;


        (c)      Individuals currently or previously involved in Oregon’s Child Welfare system;


        (d)      Individuals Transitioning to Dual Medicaid and Medicare Status;


                                                                                                        22
        (e) Individuals who meet the definitions of e#he+“HUD Homeless” erAt Risk-ef
               Hometessness,—as suchtermsare-defined by HUDin24-CFR§94-50AR 410-120-0000;
        (f)    Individuals who meet the definition of “At Risk of Homelessness” as defined by this OAR
               410-120-0000. -as-defined
                                 by HUD in 24 CFR 6945.


        fe}(g)         Individuals identified as Young Adults with Special Health Care Needs (YSHCN)


4445}(146)     “HRSN Eligibility Screening” means the process by which an MCE determines whether an
      individual:


        (a)    is enrolled in Medicaid;


        (b)    belongs to a Covered Population;


        (c)    has at least one HRSN Clinical Risk Factor applicable to the HRSN Service(s) for which
               they are being screened;


        (d) has at least one HRSN Social Risk Factor applicable to the HRSN Service(s) for which they
               are being screened;


        fe}-is not receiving the same or substantially similar service from a state or federally funded
               program that would be received from the MCE if authorized to receive the HRSN
               Services; and


        H(e)           meets any other additional required eligibility criteria that may apply in
               connection with the specific HRSN Services that may be needed.


4446}(147)     “HRSN Eligible” means      a Member except for individuals receiving the BRG service
      package defined in OAR 410-135-0030, who meets all of the following criteria:


        (a)    Belongs to at least one of the HRSN Covered Populations;


        (b) Has at least one HRSN Clinical Risk Factor applicable to the HRSN Services for which they
               are being screened;


        (c)    Has at least one HRSN Social Risk Factor applicable to the HRSN Services for which they
               are being screened; and


        (d)    Meets any additional eligibility criteria and requirements that may apply in connection
               with thea specific HRSN Services (OAR 410-120-2000).


                                                                                                         23
             a                  ”




(148) “HRSN Outreach and Engagement Services” means the activities performed by HRSN Service
     Providers or Contractor for the purpose of identifying OHP enrolled individuals presumed to
     be in an HRSN Covered Population with a qualifying HRSN Clinical Risk Factor and HRSN Social
     Risk Factor, and connecting them to HRSN Services and other services and supportspresumed
     eligible
     HRSN-ClmateRetated
              for   Services, as defined in OAR 410-120-2000.




(149) “HRSN Request” means a request from an HRSN Connector organization or individual made to
     an MCE for the purpose of requesting that the MCE     perform an HRSN Eligibility Screening. An
     HRSN Request is comprised of, at minimum, the name and contact information of the
     individual being recommended    and identification of the anticipated HRSN Sservice need. An
     HRSN Request may also include confirmation of OHP Medicaid enrollment or confirmation the
     individual is a Member enrolled in the MCE’s CCO (or both), as well as any other information
     regarding the individual’s potential HRSN Eligibility. The MCE’s or the Authority, as applicable
     will be required to document its attempts to collect the information needed to determine
     eligibility.


                                                                                                    24
(150) “HRSN Self-Attestation” means an oral or written attestation made by the Member or
      Member Representative that they satisfy the applicable requirements necessary to establish
      the Member is HRSN Eligible to receive one or more HRSN Services.


(151) “HRSN Service Provider” means a private or public social service organization, community
      organization, or other similar individual or entity that provides HRSN Services.


(152) “HRSN Service Vendor” means any individual or entity that is contracted or procured by an
      MICE or an HRSN Service Provider to deliver or provide HRSN Services directly to an HRSN
      Eligible Member who has been approved to receive HRSN Services. Examples of HRSN Service
      Vendors include, without limitation, entities or individuals that deliver or install air
      conditioners, heaters, air filtration devices, Portable Power Supply (PPSs) or mini refrigeration
      units to the homes or non-institutional, non-congregate primary residences of Members, as
      well as home modification vendors, landlords, hotels/motels, chore service providers, utilities
      and moving companies, and pest eradication companies and storage facilities, and
      organizations that assess Members for, plan, prepare, or deliver Medically Tailored Mealserin
       |             fa        sas     _additionally-hele-teinstal


(153) “HRSN Services” means Climate-Related Supports, Housing Related Supports, Nutrition
      Related Supports, and asseciated HRSN         Outreach and Engagement services that address a
      Member’s Health-Related Social Needs. Additional information regarding the different
      components of HRSN Services are detailed in the HRSN Guidance Document.


(154) “HRSN       Social Risk Factor” means the need(s) of a Member related to a Health-Related Social
      Needs service. The HRSN Social Risk Factors are specific to each of the HRSN Services, which
      are Climate-Related Supports, Housing, aae-Nutrition and Outreach and Engagement Services.
      HRSN Social Risk Factors include:


           (a)   HRSN Climate Device Social Risk Factor: An individual who resides in their own home or
                 non-institutional primary residence and for whom     an air conditioner, heater, air
                 filtration device, portable power supply (PPSs), and/or refrigeration units for
                 medications is Clinically Appropriate as   a component of health services treatment or
                 prevention.
           (b)   HRSN Housing-Related Social Risk Factor: An individual who is homeless as defined by
                 the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) in 24 CFR 91.5 or at risk
                 of homelessness defined by OAR 410-120-0000 or who requires a clinically appropriate
                 home modification/remediation service.
           (c)   HRSN Nutrition-Related Social Risk Factor: An individual meeting the USDA definition of
                 low food security




                                                                                                          25
        (d)   HRSN Outreach and Engagement Social Risk Factor: An individual requiring support
              accessing HRSN services and/or other necessary federal, state or local services and
              supports.



{4544(155)    “HUD Homeless” has the meaning assigned to it by the U.S. Department of Housing and
      Urban Development (HUD) in 24 CFR § 91.5.


44553(156)    “Indian Health Care Provider” (IHCP) means an Indian health program operated by the
      Indian Health Service (IHS) or by an Indian Tribe, Tribal Organization or an urban Indian
      organization (otherwise known as an |/T/U) as defined in section 4 of the Indian Health Care
      Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1603).


4456}(157)    “Indian Health Program” means any Indian Health Service (IHS) facility, any federally
      recognized tribe or tribal organization, or any FQHC with a 638 designation.


4454158)      “Indian Health Service (IHS)” means an operating division (OPDIV) within the U.S.
      Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) responsible for providing medical and public
      health services to members of federally recognized tribes and Alaska Natives.


4458}(159)    “Indian Managed    Care Entities” (IMCE) means a CCO, MCO, PIHP, PAHP, PCCM, or PCCM
      entity that is controlled (section 1903(m)(1)(C) of the Act) by the Indian Health Service, a
      Tribe, Tribal Organization, or Urban Indian Organization, or a consortium, which may be
      composed of one or more Tribes, Tribal Organizations, or Urban Indian Organizations, and
      which may also include the Service.


{459}(160)    “Indigent” means for the purposes of access to the Intoxicated Driver Program Fund
      (ORS 813.602), individuals with-out health insurance coverage, public or private, who meet
      standards for indigence adopted by the federal government as defined in ORS 813.602(5).


4460}(161)    “Individual Adjustment Request Form (OHP 1036)” means a form used to resolve an
      incorrect payment ona      previously paid claim, including underpayments or overpayments.


44644(162)    “Individuals Involved with Child Welfare” means Members who are currently, or have
      previously been, involved in Oregon’s Child Welfare System including members who are
      currently or have previously been:


        (a)   in foster/substitute care,
        (b)   the recipient of adoption or guardianship assistance;
        (c)   served onan in-home plan; or
        fa}the subject of an open child welfare case.tfester/substitute-
                                                                     care:




                                                                                                      26
4462}(163)   “Individuals Transitioning to Dual Status” means Members enrolled in Medicaid who are
      transitioning to dual status with Medicare and Medicaid coverage. Members shall be included
      in HRSN Covered Population for the ninety (90) calendar days        preceding the date Medicare
      coverage is to take effect and 270 calendar days after it takes effect. Eligibility for services
      must be determined within 270 calendar days        after transition to dual status.   ReansMembers




4463+(164)   “Inpatient Hospital Services” means services that are furnished in a hospital for the care
      and treatment of an inpatient. (See Division Hospital Services program administrative rules in
      chapter 410, division 125 for inpatient covered services.)


44644(165)   “Institutional Level of Income Standards (ILIS)” means three times the amount SSI pays
      monthly to a person who has no other income and who is living alone in the community. This
      is the standard used for Medicaid eligible individuals to calculate eligibility for long-term
      nursing care in a nursing facility, Intermediate Care Facilities for Individuals with Intellectual
      Disabilities (ICF/IID), and individuals on ICF/IID waivers or eligibility for services under Aging
      and People with Disabilities (APD) Home and Community Based Services program.


4465}(166)   “Institutionalized” means a patient admitted to a nursing facility or hospital for the
      purpose of receiving nursing or hospital care for a period of 30 days or more.


4466}(167)   “International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-10-
      CM) (including volumes 1, 2, and 3, as revised annually)” means a book of diagnosis codes
      used for billing purposes when treating and requesting reimbursement for treatment of
      diseases.


H6A(168)     “Joint Fair Hearing Request” means a request for a fair hearing that is included in an
      appeal request submitted to an Exchange or other insurance affordability program or appeals
      entity, in accordance with the signed agreement between the agency and an Exchange or
      Exchange appeals entity or other program or appeals entity described in 42 CFR 435.1200.




                                                                                                           27
4468}(169)    “Laboratory” means a facility licensed under ORS 438 and certified by CMS, Department
      of Health and Human Services (DHHS), as qualified to participate under Medicare and to
      provide laboratory services (as defined in this rule) within or apart from a hospital. An entity is
      considered to be a laboratory if the entity derives materials from the human body for the
      purpose of providing information for the diagnosis, prevention, or treatment of any disease or
      impairment of or the assessment of the health of human beings. If an entity performs even
      one laboratory test, including waived tests for these purposes, it is considered to be a
      laboratory under the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act (CLIA).


4469}(170)    “Laboratory Services” means those professional and technical diagnostic analyses of
      blood, urine, and tissue ordered by a physician or other licensed practitioner of the healing
      arts within their scope of practice as defined under state law and provided to a patient by or
      under the direction of a physician or appropriate licensed practitioner in an office or similar
      facility, hospital, or independent laboratory.


4470}(171)    “Licensed Direct Entry Midwife” means a practitioner who has acquired the requisite
      qualifications to be registered or legally licensed to practice midwifery by the Public Health
      Division.


4-A44(172)    “Liability Insurance” means insurance that provides payment based on legal liability for
      injuries or illness. It includes, but is not limited to, automobile liability insurance, uninsured
      and underinsured motorist insurance, homeowner’s liability insurance, malpractice insurance,
      product liability insurance, Worker's Compensation, and general casualty insurance. It also
      includes payments under state wrongful death statutes that provide payment for medical
      damages.


4-724(173)    “Long-Term Acute Care (LTAC) Hospital” means a facility that provides specialty care
      designed for patients with serious medical problems that require intense, special treatment
      for an extended period of time.


{473}(174)    “Long-term Care or Long-term Services and Supports” means Medicaid funded Long-
      term care or long-term services and supports services that include:


        (a)   “Long-term Care” as defined in OAR 461-001-0000 means the system through which the
              Department of Human Services provides a broad range of social and health services to
              eligible adults who are aged, blind, or have disabilities for extended periods of time. This
              includes nursing homes and behavioral health care outlined in OAR chapter 410, division
              172 Medicaid Behavioral Health, including state psychiatric hospitals;


        (b) “Long-term Services and Supports” means the Medicaid services and supports provided
              under a CMS approved waiver to assist individual's needs and to avoid


                                                                                                           28
              institutionalization as defined in OAR chapter 411, division 4 and defined as Medicaid
              Home and Community-Based Settings and Services (HCBS) and as outlined in OAR
              chapter 410, division 172 (Medicaid Payment for Behavioral Health Services).


(175) "Low Food Security” -means reduced quality, variety, or desirability of diet; little or no
      indication of reduced food intake as measured by the U.S. Household Food Security Survey
      Module:    Six Item Short Form from the U.S. Department     of Agriculture.


{474}(176)    “Managed   Care Entity (MCE)” means an entity that enters into a contract to provide
      services in a managed care delivery system, including but not limited to managed care
      organizations, prepaid health plans, primary care case managers and Coordinated Care
      Organizations.


4475}(177)    “Managed   Care Organization (MCO)” means a contracted health delivery system
      providing capitated or prepaid health services, also known as a Prepaid Health Plan (PHP). An
      MCO     is responsible for providing, arranging, and making reimbursement arrangements for
      covered services as governed by state and federal law. An MCO        may be a Chemical
      Dependency Organization (CDO), Dental Care Organization (DCO), Mental Health Organization
      (MHO), or Physician Care Organization (PCO).


{476}(178)    “Managing Employee” means a general manager, business manager, administrator,
      director, or other individual who exercises operational or managerial control over, or who
      directly or indirectly conducts the day-to-day operations of the provider, whether the provider
      is an individual, institution, organization or agency.


44744(179)    “Maternity Case Management” means a program available to pregnant clients. The
      purpose of maternity case management is to extend prenatal services to include non-medical
      services that address social, economic, and nutritional factors. For more information refer to
      the Division’s Medical-Surgical Services program administrative rules.


478}(180)     “Meaningful access” means client or member-centered access reflecting the following
      statute and standards:


        (a)   Pursuant to Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 1557 of the Affordable Care
              Act and the corresponding Federal Regulation at 45 CFR Part 92 and The Americans with
              Disabilities Act (ADA), providers’ telemedicine or telehealth services shall accommodate
              the needs of individuals who have difficulty communicating due to a medical condition,
              who need accommodation due to a disability, advanced age or who have Limited English
              Proficiency (LEP) including providing access to auxiliary aids and services as described in
              45 CFR Part 92;



                                                                                                          29
        (b) National Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services (CLAS) Standards at
              https://thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov/clas/standards; and


        (c)   As applicable to the client or member, Tribal based practice standards:
              https://www.oregon.gov/OHA/HSD/AMH/Pages/EBP.aspx;


        (d) “Synchronous” means an interaction between a provider and a client or member that
              occurs at the same time using an interactive technology. This may include audio only,
              video only, or audio with video and may include remote monitoring.


44793(181)    “Medicaid” means a joint federal and state funded program for medical assistance
      established by Title XIX of the Social Security Act as amended and administered in Oregon by
      the Authority.


4480}(182)    “Medical Assistance Eligibility Confirmation” means verification through the Electronic
      Verification System (EVS), AVR, Secure Web site or Electronic Data Interchange (EDI), or an
      authorized Department or Authority representative.


44844(183)    “Medical Assistance Program” means a program for payment of health services
      provided to eligible Oregonians, including Medicaid and CHIP services under the OHP
      Medicaid Demonstration Project and Medicaid and CHIP services under the State Plan, or
      Healthier Oregon, or Bridge Program, or any other programs that may be prescribed by the
      Authority from time to time, in accordance with ORS 414.025(17).


{482}(184)    “Medical Care Identification” means the card commonly called the “medical card” or
      medical ID issued to clients (called the Oregon Health ID starting Aug. 1, 2012).


4483+(185)    “Medical Services” means care and treatment provided by a licensed medical provider
      directed at preventing, diagnosing, treating, or correcting   a medical problem.


{484}(186)    “Medical Transportation” means transportation to or from covered medical services.


4485}(187)    “Medically     Appropriate”


        (a)   Means health services, items, or medical supplies that are:


                    (i)    Recommended by a licensed health provider practicing within the scope of
                           their license; and




                                                                                                        30
                     (ii) Safe, effective, and appropriate for the patient based on standards of good
                            health practice and generally recognized by the relevant scientific or
                            professional community based on the best available evidence; and


                     (iii) Not solely for the convenience or preference of an OHP client, member, ora
                            provider of the service item or medical supply; and


                     (iv) The most cost effective of the alternative levels or types of health services,
                            items, or medical supplies that are covered services that can be safely and
                            effectively provided to a Division client or member in the Division or MCE’s
                            judgment.


        (b)   All covered services must be medically appropriate for the member or client, but not all
              medically appropriate services are covered services.


        (c)   For Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and Treatment (EPSDT), see chapter 410
              Division 151.


4486}(188)    “Medically Necessary” means:


        (a)   Health services and items that are required to address one or more of the following:


                     (i)    The prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of a client or member's disease,
                            condition, or disorder that could result in health impairments or a disability;
                            or


                     (ii)   The client’s or member’s ability to achieve age-appropriate growth and
                            development; or


                     (iii) The client’s or member’s ability to attain, maintain, or regain independence in
                            self-care, ability to perform activities of daily living or improve health status;
                            or


                     (iv) The client’s or member’s ability to have access to the benefits of non-
                            institutionalized community living, to achieve person centered care goals, and
                            to live and work in the setting of their choice, when they are receiving Long
                            Term Services or Supports (as defined in these rules);


        (b)   A medically necessary service must also be medically appropriate. All covered services
              must be medically necessary, but not all medically necessary services are covered
              services.


                                                                                                                 31
        (c)   For Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and Treatment (EPSDT), see chapter 410
              Division 151.


(4874(189)    “Medicare” means a federally administered program offering health insurance benefits
      for persons aged 65 or older and certain other aged or disabled persons. This program
      includes:


        (a)   Hospital Insurance (Part A) for inpatient services in a hospital or skilled nursing facility,
              home health care, and hospice care; and


        (b) Medical Insurance (Part B) for physicians’ services, outpatient hospital services, home
              health care, end-stage renal dialysis, and other medical services and supplies;


        (c)   Prescription drug coverage (Part D) means covered Part D drugs that include
              prescription drugs, biological products, insulin as described in specified paragraphs of
              section 1927(k) of the Social Security Act, and vaccines licensed under section 351 of the
              Public Health Service Act. It also includes medical supplies associated with the injection
              of insulin. Part   D covered drugs prohibit Medicaid Title XIX Federal Financial
              Participation (FFP). For limitations, see the Division’s Pharmaceutical Services program
              administrative rules in chapter 410, division 121.


4488}(190)    “Medical Nutrition Therapy means” an evidence-based application of the Nutrition Care
      Process provided by licensed dietitians; focused on prevention, delay or management of
      diseases and conditions; and involving an in-depth assessment, periodic reassessment and
      intervention(s). (OAR 834-020-0000)


44893(191)    “Medicare Advantage” means an organization approved by CMS to offer Medicare
      health benefits plans to Medicare beneficiaries.


{490}(192)    “Member”     means an OHP client enrolled with a pre-paid health plan or coordinated
      care organization.


4494}(193)    “National Correct Coding Initiative (NCCI)” means the Centers for Medicare and
      Medicaid Services (CMS) developed the National Correct Coding Initiative (NCCI) to promote
      national correct coding methodologies and to control improper coding leading to
      inappropriate payment.


44924(194)    “National Drug Code or (NDC)” means a universal number that identifies a drug. The
      NDC number consists of 11 digits in a 5-4-2 format. The Food and Drug Administration assigns
      the first five digits to identify the manufacturer of the drug. The manufacturer assigns the



                                                                                                              32
      remaining digits to identify the specific product and package size. Some packages shall display
      less than 11 digits, but the number assumes leading zeroes.


{493}(195)    “National Provider Identification (NPI)” means federally administered provider number
      mandated for use on HIPAA covered transactions; individuals, provider organizations, and
      subparts of provider organizations that meet the definition of health care provider (45 CFR
      160.103) and who conduct HIPAA covered transactions electronically are eligible to apply for
      an NPI. Medicare and Medicaid covered entities are required to apply for an NPI.


44944(196)    “Naturopathic physician” means an individual licensed to practice naturopathic
      medicine by the Oregon Board of Naturopathic Medicine.


4495}(197)    “Naturopathic Services” means services provided within the scope of practice as defined
      under state law and by rules of the Oregon Board of Naturopathic Medicine.


4496}(198)    “Non-Billing Provider” also referred to as non-payable, means a provider who is issued a
      provider number for purposes of rendering, ordering, referring, prescribing, data collection,
      encounters, or non-claims-use of the Provider Web Portal (e.g., eligibility verification).


44974(199)    “Non-covered Services” means services or items for which the Authority is not
      responsible for payment or reimbursement. Non-covered services are identified in:


        (a)   OAR 410-120-1200 Excluded Services and Limitations; and


        (b)   OAR 410-120-1210 Medical Assistance Benefit Packages and Delivery System;


        (c)   OAR 410-141-3820 OHP Benefit Package of Covered Services;


        (d)   OAR 410-141-0520 Prioritized List of Health Services; and


        (e)   Any other applicable Division administrative rules.


4493}(200)    “Non-Emergent Medical Transportation Services (NEMT)” means transportation to or
      from a source of covered service, that does not involve a sudden, unexpected occurrence
      which creates a medical crisis requiring emergency medical services as defined in OAR 410-
      120-0000 and requiring immediate transportation to a site, usually a hospital, where
      appropriate emergency medical care is available. NEMT does not cover the cost of
      transportation to authorized HRSN services.




                                                                                                      33
{499}(201)      “Nurse Anesthetist, C.R.N.A.” means a registered nurse licensed in the State of Oregon
        as a CRNA who is currently certified by the National Board of Certification and Recertification
        for Nurse Anesthetists.


200}(202)       “Nurse Practitioner” means an individual licensed as a registered nurse and certified by
        the Board of Nursing to practice as a nurse practitioner pursuant to state law.


204}(203)       “Nurse Practitioner Services” means services provided within the scope of practice of a
        nurse practitioner as defined under state law and by rules of the Board of Nursing.


024(204)        “Nursing Facility” means a facility licensed and certified by the Department and defined
        in OAR 411-070-0005.


(205) “Nursing Services” means health care services provided to a patient by a registered
        professional nurse or a licensed practical nurse under the direction of a licensed professional
        within the scope of practice as defined by state law.


(206)           “Nutrition Related Supports” means nutrition services provided to eligible members to
    improve their access to food and health (as detailed in OAR 410-120-2000). Nutrition Related
    Supports include the following:
          (a) Assessment for Medically Tailored Meals,
          (b) Medically Tailored Meals,
          (c)   Meals,
          (d) Pantry Stocking,
          (e)   Fruit and Vegetable Benefit, and
          (f)   Nutrition Education.


203}(207)       “Nutritional Counseling” means counseling that takes place as part of the treatment of
        an individual with a specific condition, deficiency, or disease such as diabetes,
        hypercholesterolemia, or phenylketonuria.


044(208)        “Occupational Therapist” means an individual licensed by the State Board of Examiners
        for Occupational Therapy.


205}(209)       “Occupational Therapy” means the functional evaluation and treatment of individuals
        whose ability to adapt or cope with the task of living is threatened or impaired by
        developmental deficiencies, physical injury or illness, the aging process, or psychological
        disability. The treatment utilizes task-oriented activities to prevent or correct physical and
        emotional difficulties or minimize the disabling effect of these deficiencies on the life of the
        individual.




                                                                                                           34
206}(210)     “Ombudsman Services” means advocacy services provided by the Authority to clients
     whenever the client is reasonably concerned about access to, quality of, or limitations on the
      health services provided.


P07(211)      “Oregon Health ID” means a card the size of a business card that lists the client’s name,
     client ID (prime number), and the date it was issued.


08}(212)      “Oregon Health Plan (OHP)” means the Medicaid and Children’s Health Insurance (CHIP)
      Demonstration Project that expands Medicaid and CHIP eligibility beyond populations
     traditionally eligible for Medicaid to other low-income populations and Medicaid and CHIP
     services under the State Plan.


09}(213)      “Optometric Services” means services provided within the scope of practice of
     optometrists as defined under state law.


240}(214)     “Optometrist” means an individual licensed to practice optometry pursuant to state law.


Q444(215)     “Oregon Health Authority (Authority)” means the agency established in ORS Chapter
     413 that administers the funds for Titles XIX and XXI of the Social Security Act. It is the single
     state agency for the administration of the medical assistance program under ORS chapter 414.
      For purposes of these rules, the agencies under the authority of the Oregon Health Authority
     are the Public Health Division, Health Systems Division, External Relations, Health Policy and
     Analytics, Fiscal and Operations, Health System Division, Office of Equity and Inclusion, and
     the Oregon State Hospital.


42)(216)      “Oregon Youth Authority (OYA)” means the state department charged with the
      management and administration of youth correction facilities, state parole and probation
     services, and other functions related to state programs for youth corrections.


243}(217)     “Out-of-State Providers” means any provider located outside the borders of the State of
     Oregon:


        (a) Contiguous area providers are those located no more than 75 miles from the border of
              the State of Oregon;


        (b)   Non-contiguous area providers are those located more than 75 miles from the borders
              of the State of Oregon.


444(218)      “Outpatient Hospital Services” means services that are furnished in a hospital for the
     care and treatment of an outpatient. For information on outpatient-covered services, see the
      Division’s Hospital Services administrative rules chapter 410, division 125.


                                                                                                          35
245}(219)     “Overdue Claim” means a valid claim that is not paid within 45 days of the date it was
      received.


2246}(220)    “Overpayment” means a payment made by the Authority to a provider in excess of the
      correct Authority payment amount for a service. Overpayments are subject to repayment to
      the Authority.


Q44(221)      “Overuse” means use of medical goods or services at levels determined by Authority
      medical staff or medical consultants to be medically unnecessary or potentially harmful.


Q48}(222)     ‘Ownership interest’ means the possession of equity in the capital, the stock, or the
      profits of the disclosing entity.   A person with an ownership or control interest is a person or
      corporation that:


        (a)   Has an ownership interest totaling 5 percent or more in a disclosing entity;


        (b)   Has an indirect ownership interest equal to 5 percent or more in a disclosing entity;


        (c)   Has a combination of direct and indirect ownership interests equal to 5 percent or more
              in a disclosing entity;


        (d) Owns an interest of 5 percent or more in any mortgage, deed of trust, note, or other
              obligation secured by the disclosing entity if that interest equals at least 5 percent of the
              value of the property or assets of the disclosing entity;


        (e)   Is an officer or director of a disclosing entity that is organized as a corporation; or


        (f)   Isa partner ina disclosing entity that is organized as a partnership.


249}(223)     “Participating provider” means a provider that has a contractual relationship with an
      MCE. A Participating Provider is not a Subcontractor solely by virtue of a Participating Provider
      agreement with an MCE. “Network Provider” has the same meaning as Participating Provider.


Q20}(224)     “Payable Provider” means a provider who is issued a provider number for purposes of
      submitting medical assistance program claims directly to the Authority for payment.


QQ244(225)    “Payment Authorization” means authorization granted by the responsible agency,
      office, or organization for payment prior or subsequent to the delivery of services, as
      described in these general rules and the appropriate program rules. See the individual
      program rules for services requiring authorization.




                                                                                                          36
(Q224(226)     “Peer Review Organization (PRO)” means an entity of health care practitioners of
      services contracted by the state to review services ordered or furnished by other practitioners
      in the same professional field.


223}(227)      “Peer Support Specialist” means an individual providing services to another individual
      who shares a similar life experience such as (i) addiction to addiction, (ii) mental health
      condition to mental health condition, or (iii) family member of an individual with a mental
      health condition to family member of an individual with     a mental health condition. A peer
      support specialist shall be a self-identified individual:


        (a) Currently or formerly receiving addictions or mental health services;


        (b) In recovery from an addiction disorder who meets the abstinence requirements for
               recovering staff in alcohol or other drug treatment programs;


        (c)    In recovery from problem gambling.


Q244(228)      “Peer Wellness Specialist” including Family Support Specialist and Youth Support
      Specialist means an individual who is responsible for assessing mental health service and
      support needs of the individual’s peers through community outreach, assisting individuals
      with access to available services and resources, addressing barriers to services and providing
      education and information about available resources and mental health issues in order to
      reduce stigmas and discrimination toward consumers of mental health services, and to
      provide direct services to assist individuals in creating and maintaining recovery, health, and
      wellness.


(Q25}(229)     “Person Centered Care” means care that reflects the individual patient’s strengths and
      preferences, reflects the clinical needs of the patient as identified through an individualized
      assessment, is based upon the patient’s goals, and shall assist the patient in achieving the
      goals.


(226}(230)     “Person-Centered Service Plan” and “PCSP” each means the HRSN-related component
      of the care plan that is developed in consultation with the Member upon authorization of
      Clrmate-Retated SupsertsHRSN       Services. The PCSP must be reviewed and revised upon
      reassessment of need at least every twelve (12) months, when the Member’s circumstances
      or needs change significantly, or at the request of the Member.


Q2H(231)       “Personal Health Navigator” means an individual who provides information, assistance,
      tools, and support to enable a patient to make the best health care decisions in the patient’s
      particular circumstances and considering the patient’s needs, lifestyle, combination of
      conditions, and desired outcome.


                                                                                                        37
QQ28}(232)   “Pharmaceutical Services” means services provided by a pharmacist, including
      medications dispensed in a pharmacy upon an order of a licensed practitioner prescribing
      within the scope of practice.


229}(233)    “Pharmacist” means an individual licensed to practice pharmacy pursuant to state law.


230}(234)    “Physical Capacity Evaluation” means an objective, directly observed measurement of a
      person's ability to perform a variety of physical tasks combined with subjective analysis of
      abilities of the individual.


2344(235)    “Physical Therapist” means an individual licensed by the relevant state licensing
      authority to practice physical therapy.


(232)(236)   “Physical Therapy” means treatment comprising exercise, massage, heat or cold, air,
      light, water, electricity, or sound for the purpose of correcting or alleviating any physical or
      mental disability, or the performance of tests as an aid to the assessment, diagnosis, or
      treatment of a human      being. Physical therapy may not include radiology or electrosurgery.


(233}(237)   “Physician” means an individual licensed to practice medicine pursuant to state law of
      the state in which they practice medicine or an individual licensed to practice medicine
      pursuant to federal law for the purpose of practicing medicine under a contract with the
      federal government. A physician may be an individual licensed under ORS 677 or ORS 685.


234)(238)    “Physician Assistant” means an individual licensed as a physician assistant in accordance
      with ORS 677. Physician assistants provide medical services under the direction and
      supervision of an Oregon licensed physician according to a practice description approved by
      the Board of Medical Examiners.


235}(239)    “Physician Services” means services provided within the scope of practice as defined
      under state law by or under the personal supervision of a physician.


236}(240)    “Podiatric Services” means services provided within the scope of practice of podiatrists
      as defined under state law.


Q34(241)     “Podiatrist” means an individual licensed to practice podiatric medicine pursuant to
      state law.


238}(242)    “Post-Payment Review” means review of billings or other medical information for
      accuracy, medical appropriateness, level of service, or for other reasons subsequent to
      payment of the claim.



                                                                                                         38
(239}(243)    “Practitioner” or “Practitioner of the Healing Arts” means an individual licensed
      pursuant to state law to engage in the provision of health care services within the scope of the
      practitioner's license or certification.


240\(244)     “Prepaid Health Plan (PHP)” means a managed       health, dental, chemical dependency, or
      mental health organization that contracts with the Authority on a case managed, prepaid,
      capitated basis under OHP. PHPs may be a Chemical Dependency Organization (CDO), Dental
      Care Organization (DCO), Mental Health Organization (MHO), or Physician Care Organization
      (PCO)


Q444(245)     “Primary Care Dentist (PCD)” means a dental practitioner responsible for supervising
      and coordinating initial and primary dental care within their scope of practice for their
      members.


Q424(246)     “Primary Care Provider (PCP)” means any enrolled medical assistance provider who has
      responsibility for supervising, coordinating, and providing initial and primary care within their
      scope of practice for identified clients. PCPs initiate referrals for care outside their scope of
      practice, consultations, and specialist care and assure the continuity of medically appropriate
      client care. A Federally qualified PCP means a physician with a specialty or subspecialty in
      family medicine, general internal medicine, or pediatric medicine as defined in OAR 410-130-
      0005.


43\(247)      “Prior Authorization (PA)” means payment authorization for specified medical services
      or items given by Authority staff or its contracted agencies before providing the service. A
      physician referral is not a PA.


Q444(248)     “Prioritized List of Health Services” means the listing of conditions and treatment pairs
      developed by the Health Evidence Review Commission for the purpose of administering OHP.


245}(249)     “Private Duty Nursing Services” means nursing services provided within the scope of
      license by a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse under the general direction of the
      patient's physician to an individual who is not in a health care facility.


246}(250)     “Provider” means an individual, facility, institution, corporate entity, or other
      organization enrolled or not enrolled that provides or supplies health services or items, also
      termed a rendering provider or participating provider, or bills, obligates, and receives
      reimbursement on behalf of a rendering provider of services, also termed a Billing Provider
      (BP). The term provider refers to both rendering providers and BP unless otherwise specified.


Q47(251)      “Provider Organization” means a group practice, facility, or organization that is:




                                                                                                          39
        (a)   An employer of a provider, if the provider is required as a condition of employment to
              turn over fees to the employer; or


        (b)   The facility in which the service is provided, if the provider has a contract under which
              the facility submits claims; or


        (c)   A foundation, plan, or similar organization operating an organized health care delivery
              system, if the provider has a contract under which the organization submits the claim;
              and


        (d) Such group practice, facility, or organization is enrolled with the Authority, and
              payments are made to the group practice, facility, or organization;


        (e) An agent if such entity solely submits billings on behalf of providers and payments are
              made to each provider. (See Subparts of Provider Organization.)


P48}(252)     “Psychiatric Emergency Services (PES)” means medical and behavioral health services
      provided to individuals experiencing an acute disturbance of thought, mood, behavior, or
     social relationship that requires an immediate intervention as defined by the patient, family,
     or the community to prevent harm to the patient or others.


49}(253)      “Public Health Clinic” means a clinic operated by a county government.


250}(254)     “Public Rates” means the charge for services and items that providers, including
      hospitals and nursing facilities, made to the general public for the same service on the same
     date as that provided to Authority clients.


9544(255)     “Public Safety Power Shutoff” and- “{PSPS}” means the temporary shutdown of
     electricity for the purpose of protecting communities in high fire-risk areas when experiencing
     extreme weather events, which could cause the electrical system to spark wildfires. The
     decision to implement a PSPS is usually made by the utility provider of the affected service
     area.


524(256)      “Qualified Medicare Beneficiary (QMB)” means a Medicare beneficiary as defined by the
     Social Security Act and its amendments.


253+(257)     “Qualified Medicare and Medicaid Beneficiary (QMM)”       means a Medicare beneficiary
     who is also eligible for Division coverage.


954}(258)     “Quality Improvement” means the efforts to improve the level of performance of a key
      process or processes in health services or health care.


                                                                                                          40
55}(259)    “Quality Improvement Organization (QIO)” means an entity that has a contract with
     CMS under Part B of Title XI to perform utilization and quality control review of the health
     care furnished, or to be furnished, to Medicare and Medicaid clients; formerly known as a
      Peer Review Organization.


256}(260)   “Radiological Services” means those professional and technical radiological and other
      imaging services for the purpose of diagnosis and treatment ordered by a physician or other
      licensed practitioner of the healing arts within the scope of practice as defined under state law
     and provided to a patient by or under the direction of a physician or appropriate licensed
      practitioner in an office or similar facility, hospital, or independent radiological facility.


Q5A(261)    “Recipient” means an individual who is currently eligible for medical assistance (also
      known as a Client).


58}(262)    “Recreational Therapy” means recreational or other activities that are diversional in
      nature (includes, but is not limited to, social or recreational activities or outlets).


259}(263)   “Recoupment” means an accounts receivable system that collects money owed by the
      provider to the Authority by withholding all or a portion of a provider's future payments.


260}(264)   “Reduction      of Services” means situations in which the agency authorizes an amount,
     duration or scope of a service which is less than that requested by the beneficiary or provider.
      For example, if the individual has requested 20 physical therapy visits and the Division denies
     the individual’s coverage of 20 visits, covering instead only 10 visits—this is considered a
     denial of a service and could be appealed.


644(265)    “Referral” means the transfer of total or specified care of a client from one provider to
     another. As used by the Authority, the term referral also includes a request for a consultation
     or evaluation or a request or approval of specific services. In the case of clients whose medical
     care is contracted through a Prepaid Health Plan (PHP), or managed by a Primary Care
      Physician, a referral is required before non-emergency care is covered by the PHP or the
     Authority.


2624(266)   “Remittance Advice (RA)” means the automated notice a provider receives explaining
      payments or other claim actions. It is the only notice sent to providers regarding claim actions.


263}(267)   “Rendering provider” means an individual, facility, institution, corporate entity, or other
     organization that supplies health services or items, also termed a provider, or bills, obligates,
     and receives reimbursement on behalf of a provider of services, also termed a billing provider
      (BP). The term rendering provider refers to both providers and BP unless otherwise specified.




                                                                                                         41
644(268)     “Request for Hearing” means a clear expression in writing by an individual or
      representative that the individual wishes to appeal      a Department or Authority decision or
      action and wishes to have the decision considered by a higher authority.


265}(269)    “Representative” means an individual who can make OHP-related decisions for a client
      who is not able to make such decisions themselves.


266}(270)    “Retroactive Medical Eligibility” means eligibility for medical assistance granted to a
      client retroactive to a date prior to the client's application for medical assistance.


Q6A(271)     “Ride” means non-emergent medical transportation services for a client either to or
      from a location where covered services are provided. “Ride” does not include client-
      reimbursed medical transportation or emergency medical transportation in an ambulance.


Q68}(272)    “Rural” means a geographic area that is ten or more map miles from a population center
      of 30,000 people or less.


269}(273)    “Sanction” means an action against providers taken by the Authority in cases of misuse
      or abuse of Oregon Health Authority requirements or fraud, waste and abuse, in accordance
      with OAR 410-120-1400.


Q70}(274)    “School Based Health Service” means a health service required by an Individualized
      Education Plan (IEP) during a child's education program that addresses physical or mental
      disabilities as recommended      by a physician or other licensed practitioner.


Q74A4(275)   “Self-Sufficiency” means the division in the Department of Human Services that
      administers programs for adults and families.


QAA(276)     “Service Agreement” means an agreement between the Authority and a specified
      provider to provide identified services for a specified rate. Service agreements may be limited
      to services required for the special needs of an identified client. Service agreements do not
      preclude the requirement for a provider to enroll as a provider.


Q73}(277)    “Service location” means the location of a provider when services are rendered.


Q744(278)    “Sliding Fee Schedule” means a fee schedule with varying rates established by a
      provider of health care to make services available to indigent and low-income individuals. The
      sliding-fee schedule is based on ability to pay.


Q75}(279)    “Social Worker” means an individual licensed by the Board of Clinical Social Workers to
      practice clinical social work.


                                                                                                       42
Q76}(280)    “Speech-Language Pathologist” means an individual licensed by the Oregon Board of
      Examiners for Speech Pathology.


P7A(281)     “Speech-Language Pathology Services” means the application of principles, methods,
      and procedure for the measuring, evaluating, predicting, counseling, or instruction related to
      the development and disorders of speech, voice, or language for the purpose of preventing,
      habilitating, rehabilitating, or modifying such disorders in individuals or groups of individuals.


78}(282)     “State Facility” means a hospital or training center operated by the State of Oregon that
      provides long-term medical or psychiatric care.


Q79}(283)    “Supplemental Health Benefit State Funding” means funding for the health benefits
      included in the Healthier Oregon benefits package described in OAR 410-134-0004(3)(a-m).


Q80}(284)    “Subparts (of a Provider Organization)” means for NPI application, subparts of a health
      care provider organization may meet the definition of health care provider (45 CFR 160.103) if
      it were a separate legal entity and if it conducted HIPAA-covered transactions electronically or
      has an entity do so on its behalf and could be components of an organization or separate
      physical locations of an organization.


Q84(285)     “Subrogation” means right of the state to stand in place of the client in the collection of
      Third Party Resources (TPR).


Q824(286)    “Substance Use Disorder (SUD) Services” means assessment, treatment, and
      rehabilitation on a regularly scheduled basis or in response to crisis for alcohol or other drug
      abuse for dependent members and their family members or significant others, consistent with
      Level |, Level Il, or Level IIl of the most currently published edition of the American Society of
      Addiction Medicine Patient Placement Criteria (ASAM PPC). SUD is an interchangeable term
      with Chemical Dependency (CD), Alcohol and other Drug (AOD), and Alcohol and Drug (A & D).


2283}(287)   “Supplemental Security Income (SSI)” means a program available to certain aged and
      disabled persons that is administered by the Social Security Administration through the Social
      Security office.


84}(288)     “Surgical Assistant” means an individual performing required assistance in surgery as
      permitted by rules of the State Board of Medical Examiners.


85}(289)     “Suspension” means a temporary sanction prohibiting a provider's participation in the
      medical assistance programs by suspending the provider's Authority-assigned provider
      number for a specified period of time for one or more of the reasons in OAR 410-120-1400.



                                                                                                         43
      No payments, Title XIX, or State Funds shall be made for services provided while the provider
      is suspended.


286}(290)     “Targeted Case Management (TCM)” means activities that assist the client in a target
     group in gaining access to needed medical, social, educational, and other services. This
      includes locating, coordinating, and monitoring necessary and appropriate services. TCM
     services are often provided by allied agency providers.


P8A(291)      “Telecommunication technologies” means the use of devices and services for
     telemedicine or telehealth delivered services. These technologies include videoconferencing,
     store-and-forward imaging, streaming media including services with information transmitted
     via landlines, and wireless communications, including the Internet and telephone networks.


P8si(292)     “Telehealth” includes telemedicine and includes the use of electronic information and
     telecommunications technologies to support remote clinical healthcare, client or member and
      professional health-related education, public health, and health administration.


89}(293)      “Telemedicine” means the mode of delivering remote clinical health services using
      information and telecommunication technologies to provide consultation and education or to
     facilitate diagnosis, treatment, care management or self-management of a client or member’s
      healthcare.


290}(294)     “Termination” means a sanction prohibiting a provider's participation in the   Authority’s
      programs by canceling the provider's Authority-assigned provider number and provider
     agreement for one or more of the reasons in OAR 410-120-1400 and the provider has
     exhausted all applicable appeal rights or the timeline for appeal has expired. No payments,
     Title XIX, or state funds shall be made for services provided after the date of termination.
     Termination is permanent unless:


        (a)   The exceptions to mandatory exclusion    are met; or


        (b) Otherwise stated by the Authority at the time of termination.


2944(295)     “Third Party Liability (TPL), Third Party Resource (TPR), or Third party payer” means a
      medical or financial resource that, under law, is available and applicable to pay for medical
     services and items for an Authority client.


292\(296)     “Traditional Health Worker” means a community health worker, peer wellness
     specialist, personal health navigator, peer support specialist, birth doula, or other similar
      health workers not regulated or certified by the State of Oregon.




                                                                                                        44
93\(297)     “Traditional Health Worker” means a community health worker, peer wellness
      specialist, personal health navigator, peer support specialist, or birth doula not otherwise
      regulated or certified by the State of Oregon. OAR 950-060-0010(19)


294\(298)    “Transportation” means medical transportation.


295}(299)    “Trauma   informed approach” means approach undertaken by providers and healthcare
      or human services programs, organizations, or systems in providing mental health and
      substance use disorders treatment where there is a recognition and understanding of the
      signs and symptoms of trauma in, and the intensity of such trauma on, individuals, families,
      and others involved within a program, organization, or system, and then takes into account
      those signs, symptoms, and their intensity and fully integrates that knowledge when
      implementing and providing potential paths for recovery from mental health or substance use
      disorders. The Trauma Informed Approach also means that providers and healthcare or
      human services programs, organizations, or systems actively resist re-traumatization of the
      individuals being served within their respective entities.


296}(300)    “Trauma Informed Services” means those services provided using a trauma informed
      approach.


Q97(301)     “Service Authorization Request” means     a member’s initial or continuing request for the
      provision of a service including member   requests made by their provider or the member’s
      authorized representative.


292}(302)    “Type A Hospital” means a hospital identified by the Office of Rural Health as a Type A
      hospital.


299}(303)    “Type B AAA” means an AAA administered by a unit or combination of units of general
      purpose local government for overseeing Medicaid, financial and adult protective services,
      and regulatory programs for the elderly or the elderly and disabled.


{300}(304)   “Type B AAA Unit” means a Type B AAA funded by Oregon Project Independence (OPI),
      Title III—Older Americans Act, and Title XIX of the Social Security Act.


{3044(305)   “Type B Hospital” means a hospital identified by the Office of Rural Health as a Type B
      hospital.


{302}(306)   “Urban” means a geographic area that is less than ten map miles from a population
      center of 30,000 people or more.




                                                                                                       45
{303}(307)    “Urgent Care Services” means health services that are medically appropriate and
      immediately required to prevent serious deterioration of a client’s health that are a result of
      unforeseen illness or injury.


{304}(308)    “Usual Charge (UC)” means the lesser of the following unless prohibited from billing by
      federal statute or regulation:


        (a) The provider's charge per unit of service for the majority of non-medical assistance
              users of the same service based on the preceding month's charges;


        (b)   The provider's lowest charge per unit of service on the same date that is advertised,
              quoted, or posted. The lesser of these applies regardless of the payment source or
              means of payment;


        (c)   Where the provider has established a written sliding fee scale based upon income for
              individuals and families with income equal to or less than 200 percent of the federal
              poverty level, the fees paid by these individuals and families are not considered in
              determining the usual charge. Any amounts charged to Third Party Resources (TPR) are
              to be considered.


{305}(309)    “Utilization Review (UR)” means the process of reviewing, evaluating, and assuring
      appropriate use of medical resources and services. The review encompasses quality, quantity,
      and appropriateness of medical care to achieve the most effective and economic use of health
      care services.


{306}(310)    “Valid Claim” means an invoice received by the Division or the appropriate Authority or
      Department office for payment of covered health care services rendered to an eligible client
      that:


        (a) Can be processed without obtaining additional information from the provider of the
              goods or services or from a TPR; and


        (b) Has been received within the time limitations prescribed in these General Rules (OAR
              410 division 120).


{3807(311)    “Valid Preauthorization” means a document the Authority,     a PHP, or CCO receives
      requesting a health service for a member who may be eligible for the service at the time of
      the service, and the document contains:


        (a) A beginning and ending date not exceeding twelve months, except for cases of PHP or
              CCO enrollment where four months may apply; and


                                                                                                        46
            (b) All data fields required for processing the request or payment of the service including
                  the appropriate billing codes.


  {308}(312)      “Vision Services” means provision of corrective eyewear, including ophthalmological or
          optometric examinations for determination of visual acuity and vision therapy and devices.


  (313) “Volunteer”       (for the purposes of NEMT) means an individual selected, trained and under the
          supervision of the Department who is providing services on behalf of the Department in a
          non-paid capacity except for incidental expense reimbursement under the Department
          Volunteer Program authorized by ORS 409.360.


  (314)           “Young Adults with Special Health Care Needs” or “YSHCN” means an eligibility category
      for OHP Plus defined at OAR 410-200-0455.


  (315) “YSHCN      Benefits” means individuals enrolled as YSHCN   (defined at OAR 410-200-0455) will
          receive the OHP Plus benefit, as well as additional benefits, which include:
            (a)   Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and Treatment (EPSDT) Services, as defined in
                  chapter 410, division 151;
            (b) HRSN Services (if the YSHCN Member also meets other qualifying criteria); and
            (c)   Enhanced vision and dental benefits, meaning those benefits otherwise offered to
                  individuals age 21 and under, as described   in OAR 410-123-1260 and OAR 410-140-
                  0140.


Table 1. Climate Device-Specific and Related Outreach and Engagement             Eligible Climate Device
                           Clinical Risk Factors
   (Condition must have been active in the past 12 months. Members
       must meet age or pregnancy criteria at the time of eligibility
                      determination, as relevant.)
Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders                               Air Conditioner, Air
Bipolar and related disorders                                                   Filtration Device, Heater
Major depressive disorder with an acute care need in the past 12 months
including a suicide attempt, crisis services utilization (emergency
department, mobile crisis team, etc.), acute psychiatric hospitalization,
or residential treatment.
One or more of the following substance use disorders: alcohol use
disorder, hallucinogen use disorders, inhalant use disorder, opioid use
disorder, stimulant use disorder
Major neurocognitive disorders
Chronic lower respiratory condition including chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma requiring regular use of asthma
controlling medications, restrictive lung disease, fibrosis, chronic
bronchitis, bronchiectasis
Chronic cardiovascular disease, including cerebrovascular disease and
heart disease

                                                                                                            47
Spinal cord injury
In-home hospice
Any sensory, physical, intellectual, or develoomental disability that
increases health risks during extreme climate events
Child less than 6 years of age and currently has, has a history of, or is at
risk for at least one of the following:
         Heat stroke or heat exhaustion
         Hypothermia, frostbite, or chilblains
         Malnutrition
         Dehydration
        Child maltreatment as defined by the CDC
        (httos://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/CM_         Surveillance-
        a.pdf)
        Is a child with a special healthcare need (CYSHCN) as defined by
        HRSA (httpos://mchb.hrsa.gov/programs-impact/focus-
        areas/children-youth-special-health-care-needs-cyshcni#i)
        An acute or chronic respiratory condition
        A respiratory or gastrointestinal infectious disease, or becoming
        febrile with an infectious illness
         Low birth weight of <2500 grams
Pregnant and currently has, has a history of, or is at risk for at least one
of the following:
         Heat stroke or heat exhaustion
         Hypothermia, frostbite, or chilblains
        An acute or chronic respiratory condition
         Infection
         High-risk pregnancy as defined by the NIH
         (httos://www.nichd.nih.gov/health/topics/high-
         risk/conditioninfo)
         History of previous pregnancy, delivery, or birth complication
        including gestational diabetes, preeclampsia, preterm labor,
        preterm birth, placental abruption, newborn low birth weight,
        stillbirth
        Abuse or interpersonal violence
         Malnutrition
         Hyperemesis gravidarum and other causes of dehydration
         Maternal low birth weight of <2500 grams
         Multiple    pregnancy
         Mental health condition
Adult 65 years and older and currently has, has a history of, or is at risk
for at least one of the following:


                                                                                48
    e   Heat stroke or heat exhaustion
    e   Hypothermia, frostbite, or chilblains
    e   Malnutrition
    e   Dehydration
    e   Currently taking medications that impact heat tolerance,
        including for upper respiratory infections, allergies, COPD,
        muscle spasms, blood pressure, diuresis, diarrhea, constipation,
        anti-inflammation, mental health conditions, and sleep
    e   Abuse or neglect
    e   A respiratory or gastrointestinal infectious disease, or becoming
        febrile with an infectious illness
    e   Mental health condition
    e    Twoor more chronic health conditions
Chronic kidney disease                                                       Air Conditioner,   Heater
Diabetes mellitus, requiring any medication, oral or insulin
Multiple sclerosis
Parkinson's disease
Previous heat-related or cold-related illness requiring urgent or acute
care, e.g. emergency room and urgent care visits
Individual requires home   oxygen   use: home   oxygen, oxygen                Air Filtration Device
concentrators, home ventilator
Individual uses medications requiring refrigeration. Examples include:          Mini-refrigerator
    e   Medications for diabetes mellitus, glaucoma, and asthma;
    e   TNE inhibitors
Enteral and parenteral nutrition
Individual needs durable medical equipment (DME) requiring electricity       Portable Power Supply
for use. Examples include but are not limited to:
    e   Oxygen delivery systems, including concentrators, humidifiers,
        nebulizers, and ventilators
    e   Intermittent positive pressure breathing machines
    e   Cardiac devices
    e   Inhome dialysis and automated peritoneal dialysis
    e   Feeding Pumps
    e   lV infusions
    e   Suction pumps
    e   Power wheelchair and scooter
    e__Lift systems and electric beds
    e   Breast pumps for first 6mo post-partum
    e   Other DME medically required for sustaining life
Individual requires assistive technologies requiring electricity necessary
for communication or ADLs.


                                                                                                         49
Other conditions approved by medical exception in an individual review            Any of the above devices
for medical exception aligned with OHA’s Medical Management
Committee    Process and CCO exception       review process




      Table 2. Housing, Nutrition, and Related Outreach and Engagement Clinical Risk Factors
HRSN Clinical Risk Factor         Risk Factor Description
Complex Behavioral Health                An individual with a persistent, disabling, progressive or life-
Need                                     threatening mental health condition or substance use disorder
                                         that requires treatment or supports, or both treatment and
                                         supports, in order to achieve stabilization, prevention of
                                         exacerbation, or maintain health goals.
Developmental Disability Need            An individual with an Intellectual Disability or Develoomental
                                         Disability (as defined by OAR 411-320-0080) that requires
                                         services or supports to achieve and maintain care goals.
Complex Physical Health Need             An individual with a persistent, disabling, progressively or life-
                                         threatening physical health condition(s) requiring treatment for
                                         stabilization or prevention of exacerbation.
                                         Examples may include conditions such as: congenital anomalies
                                         that adversely impact health or function, blindness, disabling
                                         dental disorders, neurological diseases, cardiovascular diseases,
                                         pulmonary diseases, gastrointestinal diseases, liver diseases,
                                         renal diseases, endocrine diseases, hematologic disorders,
                                         musculoskeletal conditions, infectious diseases, cancers,
                                         autoimmune disorders, immunodeficiency disorders or
                                         immunosuppression
Needs Assistance with                    An individual who needs assistance with one or more Activities
ADLs/IADLs or Eligible for LTSS          of Daily Living (ADLs) as defined in OAR 411-015-0006 or
                                         Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (iADLs) as defined in OAR
                                         411-015-0007; or
                                         Receives or are determined eligible for Medicaid-funded Long-
                                         Term Services and Supports (LTSS) provided by the Oregon
                                         Department of Human Services (ODHS) Office of Aging and
                                         People with Disabilities (APD) or ODHS Office of Developmental
                                         Disabilities Services (ODDS), as defined in 410-141-3500.
Interpersonal Violence                   An individual who is experiencing or has experienced
Experience                               interpersonal violence (IPV), including domestic violence (DV),
                                         sexual violence (SV), or psychological violence
Repeated Emergency                An individual:
Department    Use and Crisis             e     With repeated use of emergency department care (defined
Encounters                                     as two or more visits in the past six months or five or more
                                               visits within the past 12 months):

                                                                                                              50
      Table 2. Housing, Nutrition, and Related Outreach and Engagement Clinical Risk Factors
HRSN Clinical Risk Factor        Risk Factor Description
                                         With two or more      crisis encounters in the past six months
                                         or five or more crisis encounters in the past 12 months,
                                         which represent an exacerbation of mental health distress,
                                         defined to include: receipt of crisis/outreach team services;
                                         use of behavioral health mobile crisis, crisis respite services,
                                         or school behavioral health crisis services; any length of
                                         stay in an adult jail or youth detention facility; or any length
                                         of stay in emergency foster care.
                                         Who was exited from a housing or behavioral healthcare
                                         program (e.g., shelter setting, day habilitation program,
                                         etc.) or froma school or an early childhood program in the
                                         past 12 months due to behaviors that are likely
                                         manifestations of a behavioral health condition, significant
                                         life stress, adversity, or trauma.
Pregnant/Postpartum              An individual who   is currently pregnant or up to 12 months
                                 postpartum and currently has, has a history of, or is at risk for at
                                 least one of the following:
                                         Infection
                                         High-risk pregnancy as defined by the NIH
                                         (httos://www.nichd.nih.gov/health/topics/high-
                                         risk/conditioninfo)
                                         Pregnancy-related death
                                         History of previous    pregnancy,   delivery, or birth
                                         complication including gestational diabetes, preeclampsia,
                                         hyperemesis gravidarum, preterm labor, preterm birth,
                                         placental abruption, newborn low birth weight, stillbirth
                                         Abuse or interpersonal violence
                                         Malnutrition
                                         Maternal low birth weight of <2500 grams
                                         Multiple pregnancy
                                         A mental health condition or substance use disorder,
                                         including a postpartum mental health condition
                                         Significant life stress, adversity, or trauma


Children less than 6 years of    A child who is less than six years of age and currently has, has a
age                              history of, or is at risk for at least one of the following:
                                         Malnutrition or at risk of develoomental or growth delay or
                                         impairment as a result of insufficient nutrition
                                         Child maltreatment as defined by the CDC
                                         (httos://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/CM           Surveilla
                                         nce- a.pdf)
                                         Is a child with a special healthcare need (CYSHCN) as
                                         defined by HRSA (https://mchb.hrsa.gov/programs-
                                         impact/focus- areas/children-youth-special-health-care-
                                         needs-cyshcni#i)

                                                                                                              51
         Table 2. Housing, Nutrition, and Related Outreach and Engagement Clinical Risk Factors
 HRSN Clinical Risk Factor             Risk Factor Description
                                            e   Low birth weight of <2500 grams
                                            e   Mental health condition
                                            e   Significant life or family stress, adversity, or trauma
 Adults 65 years of age or older      | An adult who is 65 years of age or over and currently has, has a
                                        history of, or is at risk for at least one of the following:
                                            e   Twoormore      chronic health conditions
                                            e   Social isolation placing the individual at risk for early death,
                                                neurocognitive disorders, sleep disruption, cardiovascular
                                                disease, and elder abuse
                                            e   Malnutrition
                                            e   Dehydration
                                            e   Abuse or neglect
                                            e   Significant life adversity stress, adversity, or trauma
 Young Adults with Special             An individual aged 19 to 26, with the following clinical risk factors
 Health Care Needs                     defined in STC 4.6(a):
                                            e   Have one or more complex chronic conditions as identified
                                                in the Pediatric Medical Complexity Algorithm (PCMA);
                                            e   Haveaserious emotional disturbance or serious mental
                                                health issue indicated by qualifying behavioral health
                                                diagnosis;
                                            e   _Havea diagnosed intellectual or developmental disability;
                                            e    Havean “Elevated Service Need” or functional limitations as
                                                determined by two or more affirmative responses to a
                                                screener; or
                                            e   Starting no earlier than January 1, 2026, have two or more
                                                chronic conditions as represented by a subset of the PMCA’s
                                                non-complex chronic conditions as described in the New
                                                Initiatives Implementation Plan.




OAR 410-120-1210: Medical Assistance Benefit Packages and Delivery System


Medical Assistance Benefit Packages and Delivery System


   (1)   The services clients are eligible to receive are based on their benefit package. Not all packages
         receive the same benefits.
   (2)   The Health Systems Division (Division), Medical Assistance Programs benefit package
         description, codes, eligibility criteria, coverage, limitations, and exclusions are identified in these
         rules.
   (3)   The limitations and exclusions listed here are in addition to those described in OAR 410-120-
         1200 and in any chapter 410 OARs.
   (4)   Benefit package descriptions:

                                                                                                                   52
(a) Oregon Health Plan (OHP) Plus:
            (A) Benefit package identifier: BMH;
            (B)   Eligibility criteria: As defined in federal regulations and in the 1115 OHP
                  waiver demonstration, a client is categorically eligible for medical assistance if
                  they are eligible under a federally defined mandatory, selected, optional
                  Medicaid program or the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) and also
                  meets Oregon Health Authority (Authority) adopted income and other
                  eligibility criteria;
            (C)   Coverage includes:
                    (i)    Services above the funding line on the Health Evidence Review
                           Commission (HERC) Prioritized List of Health Services (Prioritized List),
                           (OAR 410-141-3820 through 410-141-3830);
                    (ii)   Ancillary services, (OAR 410-141-3820);
                    (iii) Substance use disorder treatment and recovery services provided
                           through local substance use disorder treatment and recovery providers;
                    (iv) Mental health services based on the Prioritized List to be provided by
                           Board licensed, certified, or credentialed providers or through
                           Community Mental Health Programs certified and credentialed
                           providers;
                    (v)    Hospice;
                    (vi) Post-hospital extended care benefit up to a 20-day stay in a nursing
                           facility for non-Medicare Division clients who meet Medicare criteria for
                           a post-hospital skilled nursing placement. This benefit requires prior
                           authorization by pre-admission screening (OAR 411-070-0043) or by the
                           Coordinated Care Organization (CCO) for clients enrolled in a CCO; and
                    (vii) HRSN Services (OAR 410-120-2000).
            (D)   Limitations: Except for YSHCN     Members, tthe following services have limited
                  coverage for non-pregnant adults age 21 and older, who are outside of the
                  protected postpartum eligibility period (see OAR 410-200-0135). (Refer to the
                  cited OAR chapters and divisions for details):
                    (i)    Selected dental (OAR chapter 410, division 123 and 200);
                    (ii)   Vision services such as frames, lenses, contacts corrective devices and
                           eye exams for the purpose of prescribing glasses or contacts (OAR
                           chapter 410, division 140 and 200).


(b)   OHP with Limited Drugs:
            (A) Benefit package identifier: BMM, BMD;
            (B) Eligibility criteria: Eligible clients are eligible for Medicare and Medicaid
                  benefits;
            (C)   Coverage includes: services covered by Medicare and OHP Plus as described in
                  this rule;


                                                                                                       93
            (D)   Limitations:
                    (i)    The same as OHP Plus as described in this rule;
                    (ii)   Drugs excluded from Medicare Part D coverage that are also covered
                           under the medical assistance programs, subject to applicable limitations
                           for covered prescription drugs (Refer to OAR chapter 410, division 121
                           for specific limitations). These drugs include but are not limited to:
                                     (1)    Over-the-counter (OTC) drugs;
                                     (II)   Barbiturates (except for dual eligible individuals when
                                            used in the treatment of epilepsy, cancer or a chronic
                                            mental health disorder as Part D shall cover those
                                            indications).
            (E)   Exclusions: Drugs or classes of drugs covered by Medicare Part D Prescription
                  Drug;
            (F)   Payment for services is limited to the Medicaid-allowed payment less the
                  Medicare payment up to the amount of co-insurance and deductible;
            (G)   Cost sharing related to Medicare Part D is not covered since drugs covered by
                  Part D are excluded from the benefit package.
(c)   Qualified Medicare Beneficiary (QMB)-Only:
            (A)   Benefit Package identifier code MED;
            (B)   Eligibility criteria: Eligible clients are Medicare Part A and B beneficiaries who
                  have limited income but do not meet the income standard for full medical
                  assistance coverage;
            (C)   Coverage: Is limited to the co-insurance or deductible for the Medicare
                  service. Payment is based on the Medicaid-allowed payment less the
                  Medicare payment up to the amount of co-insurance and deductible but no
                  more than the Medicare allowable;
            (D)   Providers may not bill QMB-only clients for the deductible and coinsurance
                  amounts due for services that are covered by Medicare;
            (E)   Medicare is the source of benefit coverage for service; therefore, an OHP
                  3165 is not required for this eligibility group.    A Medicare Advance Beneficiary
                  Notice of Noncoverage (ABN) may be required by Medicare, refer to Medicare
                  for ABN requirements.
(d)   Citizenship Waived Medical (CWM)            Benefit Package defined in OAR 410-120-000. Refer
      to OAR 410-134-0005(2) and 410-134-0005(3) for coverage and billing guidance.
(e)   Compact of Free Association (COFA) Dental Program:
            (A)   Benefit Package identifier code DEN;
            (B)   Eligibility criteria: Eligible clients are specified in OAR 410-200-0445;
            (C)   Coverage is state funded and includes the types and extent of Dental services
                  that the Authority determines shall be provided to medical assistance
                  recipients in accordance with OAR Chapter 410 Division 123.




                                                                                                      04
                     (D) Coverage also includes pharmaceuticals prescribed by a dental health care
                           provider as component of covered dental services.
                     (E)   No copayments, deductibles or cost sharing shall be required for eligible
                           clients.
          (f)   Veteran Dental Program:
                     (A)   Benefit Package identifier code DEN and DNT;
                     (B) Eligibility criteria: Eligible clients are specified in OAR 410-200-0445;
                     (C) Coverage is state funded and includes the types and extent of dental services
                           that the Authority determines shall be provided to medical assistance
                           recipients in accordance with OAR Chapter 410 Division 123.
                     (D) Coverage also includes pharmaceuticals prescribed by a dental health care
                           provider as component of covered dental services.
                     (E)   No copayments, deductibles or cost sharing shall be required for eligible
                           clients.
(5)   Division clients are enrolled for covered health services and HRSN Services to be delivered
      through one of the following means:
          (a) Coordinated Care Organization (CCO):
                     (A) These clients are enrolled in a CCO that provides integrated and coordinated
                           health care;
                     (B) CCO services are obtained from the CCO or by referral from the CCO that is
                           responsible for the provision and reimbursement for physical health,
                           substance use disorder treatment and recovery, mental health services,
                           dental care, or HRSN Services.
          (b) Fee-for-service (FFS):
                     (A) These clients are not enrolled in a CCO;
                     (B) Subject to limitations and restrictions in the Division’s individual program
                           rules, the client may receive health care from any Division-enrolled provider
                           that accepts FFS clients. The provider shall bill the Division directly for any
                           covered service and shall receive a fee for the service provided.
                     (C)   Delivery of HRSN Services for members enrolled in FFS shall be provided as set
                           forth in OAR 410-120-2000.




                                                                                                             95
OAR 410-120-2000: HRSN Services Delivery


HRSN Services Delivery


The purpose of this rule is to establish the processes, standards, and obligations required to be followed
or met in administering and delivering Health Related Social Needs (HRSN) Services.
       (1)   HRSN Services General Requirements; Notices of Availability. HRSN Services are similar to
             Covered Services (as such word is defined i—n OAR 410-120-0000); however, HRSN Services
             are not subject to the medically necessary and appropriate standard for coverage under
             Oregon Health Plan (OHP) but instead are included in and paid for under OHP in accordance
             with this rule.
                    (a)     Similarities between HRSN Services and Covered Services include the right of
                            Managed Care Entitiey¢s (MCEs) to be compensated for the provision of HRSN
                            Services (in accordance with the HRSN Services Fee Schedule) and when Members
                            request HRSN Services eligibility and authorization, the MCE’s obligation to provide
                            Members with:
                                   (A) Notices outlined in this rule as well as the same notices, in form and
                                         content, that are required for Covered Services such as, for example,
                                         notices of Adverse Benefit Determinations under 42 CFR 438.404, and that
                                         comply with accessibility requirements under OARs 410-141-3580 and 410-
                                         141-3585, and 42 CFR 438.10;
                                   (B)   Service Authorizations in accordance with OAR 410-141-3835 (7), (8),
                                         (9)(d), (10), (11);
                                   (C) Grievance and Appeal rights under OARs 410-141-3875 through OAR 410-
                                         14103915, OAR 410-120-1860, and 42 CFR Subpart F; and
                                   (D) HRSN Services delivery that complies with the State 1115 Waiver, and in
                                         keeping with National Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services
                                         (CLAS) Standards at https://thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov/clas/standards.
                    (b)     MCEs shall notify all Members of the availability of HRSN Services, and the process by
                            which they may obtain an HRSN Eligibility Screening, and the standards for
                            authorization of HRSN Services.
       —     HRSN         Service Eligibility.
       (2) To receive Housing Related Supports (detailed in Table 1: Housing Related Supports)
             Members           must:
                    (a)     Meet the eligibility criteria as outlined in Table 2: HRSN Housing Eligibility Criteria;
                            and,
                    (b)     Not be eligible for substantially the same Housing Related Supports service through a
                            non-HRSN     Medicaid covered service.
       (3)   To receive Nutrition Related Supports (Table 4: Nutrition Related Supports) Members                  must:
              (a)    Meet the eligibility criteria as outlined in Table 5: HRSN      Nutrition Eligibility Criteria; and,




                                                                                                                          96
        (b)    Not be eligible for substantially the same Nutrition Related Supports service through a
               non-HRSN        Medicaid covered service.
(4) To receive HRSN Outreach and Engagement Supports (Table 7: HRSN Outreach and
    Engagement Service) the HRSN Service Provider must have confirmation the individual is
    enrolled in OHP, and presume that they belong to                a HRSN Covered Population and have at
    least one HRSN Clinical Risk Factor and one HRSN Social Risk Factor, and that they need help
    connecting to needed HRSN services and other services and supports.
Q}(5)         Identifying Members of HRSN Covered Populations that are likely eligible for HRSN
    Services. The MCE and the Authority shall ensure multiple pathways for Members to be
    identified as potentially eligible for HRSN Services.
              (a)   Pathways for identifying potentially eligible Members for HRSN Services must
                    include:
                           (A)   Proactively identifying Members who are likely eligible for HRSN Services,
                                 by first confirming they belong to an HRSN Covered Population and then
                                 confirming that they have at least one HRSN Clinical Risk Factor and are
                                 confirmed or presumed to have one HRSN Social Risk Factor for an HRSN
                                 Service through a review of the MCE or Authority’s encounter and claims
                                 data;
                           (B) Eagagiae-contracting with HRSN Service Providers to conduct HRSN
                                 Outreach and Engagement to identify Members who belong to an HRSN
                                 Covered Population and who are presumed to also have at least one HRSN
                                 Clinical Risk Factor and HRSN Social Risk Factor and make HRSN Requests;
                           (C) Engaging with and rReceiving HRSN Requests from other entities and
                                 individuals;
                          {€\(D)    Conducting proactive outreach to HRSN-contracted housing and
                                 nutrition providers and housing and nutrition providers who are known to
                                 the MCE or the Authority, but not contracted with the MCE or the
                                 Authority, to encourage communication with members that may be eligible
                                 for and benefit from HRSN Services; and
                          {Di(E) Accepting the Members’ Self-Attestations or referrals.
              (b)   The MCE and the Authority shall not require HRSN Connectors or HRSN         Service
                    Providers to use the MCE’s or the Authority’s HRSN Request Form template. Instead,
                    the MCE and the Authority must accept the HRSN Request Form used by HRSN
                    Connectors and HRSN         Service Providers so long as the HRSN Request Form includes
                    the information necessary for the MCE or, as applicable, the Authority to contact or
                    otherwise determine whether the individual would like to receive HRSN Services and
                    is interested in participating in an HRSN Eligibility Screening.
{3}(6)
   __ Screening Members for HRSN Eligibility.
              (a) The MCE and the Authority shall make good faith efforts to ensure that all Members
                    who have been identified as potentially eligible for HRSN Services are offered an
                    HRSN Eligibility Screening.


                                                                                                              o7
(b) When a Member is referred to an MCE or the Authority by an HRSN Service Provider
      or Connector that has submitted an HRSN Request Form, the MCE, or as applicable,
      the Authority, shall conduct HRSN Eligibility Screenings of Members who have been
      identified as potentially eligible for HRSN Services by collecting the information
      necessary to determine whether the Member:
               (A)   Is enrolled in OHP_except not receiving the BRG service package defined in
                     OAR 410-135-0030,
               (B)   Would like to receive HRSN Services,
               (C)   Belongs to an HRSN Covered Population,
               (D) Has-atteasterneMeets Social Risk Factor_criteria applicable to the HRSN
                     Services for which they are being screened,
               (E)   HasatleasterneMeets     Clinical Risk Factor_criteria applicable to the HRSN
                     Services for which they are being screened, and
               (F)   Is not receiving the same or substantially similar service from another
                     state, local, or federally funded program.
(c)   If the HRSN Connector does not include information on the recommended service,
      the MCE or the Authority is required to identify the specific service the individual
      needs.
fe}(d)
    __ For Members who provide the MCE or the Authority with a Self-Attestation, the
      MCE and the Authority shall rely on the Self-Attestation to complete the HRSN
      Eligibility Screening. If the Self-Attestation does not include all the information
      necessary to complete the HRSN Eligibility Screening the MCE and the Authority shall
      use good faith efforts to obtain and, as applicable, verify all information necessary to
      complete the HRSN Eligibility Screening by documenting the Member:
               (A)   Is enrolled in OHP except not receiving the BRG service package defined in
                     OAR 410-135-0030,
               (B)   Would like to receive HRSN Services,
               (C)   Belongs to an HRSN Covered Population,
               (D) Has-atteasterneMeets Social Risk Factor criteria applicable to the HRSN
                     Services for which they are being screened,
               (E) Has-atteastereMeets Clinical Risk Factor criteria applicable to the HRSN
                     Services for which they are being screened, and
               (F)   Is or is not receiving the same or substantially similar service from another
                     state, local, or federally funded program.


fhi(e)    _All efforts to collect information needed to determine HRSN Eligibility must be
      documented.        If the information included ina Member’s Self-Attestation cannot,
      using good faith efforts, be verified within a reasonable period of time the MCE and
      the Authority shall authorize the identified HRSN Services need(s) if the MCE or, as
      applicable, the Authority, has a reasonable basis for concluding the Self-Attestation is
      truthful.


                                                                                                    98
        fe}(f)   _If the potentially eligible individual is not     a Member of the OHP, the MCE or the
              Authority shall connect individuals to resources to determine OHP Eligibility as
              requested or consented to by the Member.
{4\(7) __ Authorization_of HRSN Services.
        (a)   An MCE shall authorize its own Members, and the Authority shall authorize its Fee-
              for-Service (FFS) Members, to receive HRSN Services if the MCE or, as appliable, the
              Authority has completed the HRSN Services Screening and determined and
              documented that the applicable Member:
                    (A)   Is enrolled in OHP except not receiving the BRG service package defined in
                          OAR 410-135-0030;
                    (B)   Would like to receive HRSN Services;
                    (C)   Belongs to an HRSN Covered Population;
                    (D) Haslvieets          determined the HRSA Sorwces are Clinical    Sopreoriateg
                          Clinical Risk Factor criteria,
                    (E)   Meets HRSN Social Risk Factor criteria, if distinct from the HRSN Covered
                          Population; and
                    (F)   Meets service-specific eligibility criteria, as required,
                    {D}(G) Is not receiving the same or substantially similar service from another
                          state, local, or federally funded program, based on Member attestation.
        (b)   The Authorization must identify service duration, as appropriate, not to exceed
              twelve (12) months for an initial authorization, or lesser duration if required
              according to the HRSN Guidance Document, as well as amount and scope in
              accordance with 42 CFR §438.210.
        (c)   MCEs and the Authority shall use reasonable efforts to ensure they do not knowingly
              authorize an HRSN service that is duplicative of a state or federally funded service or
              other HRSN Service the Member is already receiving.
        (d)   MCEs are required to have individuals with appropriate expertise make decisions to
              deny or reduce HRSN service, in accordance with 42 CFR § 438.210 (b).
                    (A)   Clinical staff are required to review HRSN service denials and reductions
                          based on the following criteria:
                            (i)     HRSN Clinical Risk Factors, including service-specific clinical needs
                                   (e.g., health-related condition responsive to medically tailored
                                   meals)
                            (iii) HRSN Climate Device Social Risk Factor
                            (ii)   An individual who requires a Clinically Appropriate home
                                   modification/remediation service
                    (B)   Clinical staff are not required to review authorizations, denials, or
                          reductions for HRSN Services in the following scenarios:
                            (i)    All authorizations of amount, duration and scope of HRSN Service
                                   requested




                                                                                                            99
                    (ii)   Denials and reductions based on whether the Member is part of an
                           HRSN Covered Population.
                    (iii) Denials and reductions based on an HRSN Outreach and Engagement
                           Social Risk Factor, HRSN Nutrition-Related Social Risk Factor, and
                           HRSN Housing-Related Social Risk Factor of homelessness as defined
                           by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) in
                           24 CFR 91.5 or at risk of homelessness defined by OAR 410-120-0000.
(e)   Document the approval, e+ denial, or reduction of HRSN Services.
            (A)   MCEs shall ensure the HRSN Services are furnished to all OHP Members in
                  an amount, duration, and scope that is no less than the amount, duration,
                  and scope for the same HRSN Services furnished to all OHP Members
                  under the Authority’s FFS delivery system;
            (B) The MCE or, as applicable, the Authority is required to_authorize or deny
                  the HRSN Service(s) and notify the Member of the approval or denial of
                  HRSN Services within fourteen (14) days of the-completing+he
                                                                           HRSN
                  SerHces-Elieibiity Sereeninereceiving an HRSN Request.
            (C)   HRSN Services must be denied if the individual does not meet all the HRSN
                  Eligibility Criteria for the HRSN Services for which they are screened.
            (D) All notices of Service Authorization and Denials must:
                    (i)    State the basis for the approval along with any utilization limitations
                           based on amount, duration, or scope;
                    (ii)   State the basis for denial;
                    (iii) Comply with OAR 410-141-3835(7), (8), (10), (11); and
                    (iv) Inform the Member of their Grievance and Appeal rights under OARs
                           410-141-3875 through 410-14103915, 410-120-1860, and 42 CFR
                           Subpart F.
(f)   The MCE or the Authority must notify the HRSN Connector who submitted the HRSN
      Request of the authorization or denial of the HRSN Request through a Closed Loop
      Referral if the HRSN Connector will be or would have been the HRSN Service
      Provider.
{\(¢)   _If an HRSN Eligible Member is authorized for an HRSN Service (HRSN-Authorized
      Member), then, unless the HRSN-Authorized Member objects to the sharing of their
      personal information, the MCE or as applicable, the Authority must refer the HRSN-
      Authorized Member to an HRSN Service Provider that provides the Member’s HRSN
      Service need.
            (A)_The referral must be made through a Closed Loop
            {A(B)_ Referral. If the HRSN-Authorized Member objects to the sharing of their
                  personal information with an HRSN Service Provider, then the HRSN-
                  Authorized Member must be provided with a written referral that they
                  may deliver to the HRSN Service Provider to which they have been
                  referred.


                                                                                                 60
                           (C)     The MCE or, as applicable, the Authority must_make a referral to an HRSN
                                   Provider that delivers the authorized HRSN Service(s) in accordance with
                                   the timeframes specified below, and further specified in the HRSN
                                   Guidance Document:
                                     (i)    HRSN Services deemed “Urgent Care”: Within 72 hours or as
                                            indicated in initial screening and in accordance with OAR 410-141-
                                            3840
                                     (ii)   HRSN Services deemed “Well Care”: Within four (4) weeks, or as
                                            otherwise required by applicable care coordination rules, including
                                            OAR 410-141-3860 through 410-141-3870.
                           (D) This timeline is not applicable to Members who have not authorized the
                                   sharing of their information to an HRSN Service Provider.
                           (E)     Inthe event that     availability and delivery times of HRSN Climate Devices
                                   exceed thirty (30) calendar days, Contractor shall notify OHA via
                                   Administrative Notice of the delay and allow the State to assist in
                                   identifying alternate options to best meet the HRSN Authorized Member’s
                                   HRSN Service needs.
                           {B}-+
                                     (i)    To the extent capacity permits, support the HRSN-Authorized
                                            Member’s choice of HRSN Service Provider;
                                     (ii)   Identify and refer the HRSN-Authorized Member to alternative HRSN
                                            Service Providers if needed and available; *
                                     (iii) Inform the HRSN-Authorized Member they have the right to_opt out
                                            of direct the MCE or as applicable the Actherty to-use adiffereact
                                                               4.       th HRSN      Servic Provid |     |

                                            technology, like CIE, for Closed Loop Referrals and still receive HRSN
                                            Services; and
                                     (iv) Ensure and document the Member’s HRSN Service needs are being
                                            and have been met by the HRSN Service Provider in compliance with
                                            the Member’s HRSN Person-Centered Service Plan.
       {5}(8)
         _ Confirmation of Climate-Related Supports Required (For Climate-Related Supports only).
           Prior to making a ClesedtoesReferratreferral to authorized Climate-Related Supports, the
           MCE or, as applicable, the Authority must determine availability of the Climate-Related
           Supports (either devices or any necessary installation or other related service supports, or
           both) and notify the HRSN-Authorized Member of the anticipated date or time frame that the
           Climate-Related Supports shall be available. If for any reason there is limited availability of
           either devices or necessary installation or other related service supports, the MCE shall notify
           the State of the following information:
            (a)   There is a limitation of availability of the Climate-Related Supports,


1 In accordance with fertheeming
                              Care Coordination requirements outlined in OAR 410-141-3860, 410-141-
3865, 410-141-3870.

                                                                                                                  61
     (b)    The reason for the limitation, and
     (c)    The MCE’s plan to obtain additional equivalent devices or related service supports or
            both.




    the Authority, and Tribal Governments may conduct HRSN Eligibility Screening, HRSN
    Authorization, and HRSN Service planning and provision so long as there is a documented
    policy and process for safeguarding against conflicts of interest.
{4(10)      Person-Centered         Service Plan (PCSP). Upon authorization of HRSN Services, the MCE or,
    as applicable, the Authority and the Member shall update the HRSN-Authorized Member’s
    Care Plan as outlined in OAR 410-141-3870[2] to include an HRSN PCSP for authorized the
    HRSN Service(s).
           (a)   The HRSN PCSP shall be a written component of the Member’s Care Plan as outlined
                 in OAR 410-141-3870 ja+weHingand developed with and agreed upon by the
                 Member, the Member’s guardian, or both, as applicable. The HRSN PCSP must
                 include all of the following:
                    (A) The recommended HRSN Service(s),
                    (B) The authorized HRSN Service duration,
                    {B}(C)      Whether the Member accepts or declines the recommended HRSN
                         Service.
                    (D) The HRSN Service Provider, supporting Member choice of provider and
                         working to ensure a mutually agreeable option if choices are limited,
                    {E}(E)      The determination that the recommended service, unit of service, and
                         service duration is clinically appropriate based on HRSN Clinical and Social Risk
                         Factors,
                    {D}(F)      The goals of the HRSN Service(s) and identifying other HRSN Services
                         and other OHP services the Member may need (if not already included in the
                         Member’s Care Plan),-
                    (G) The anticipated follow-up and transition plan, including conducting
                         reassessment for HRSN      Services prior to the conclusion of the service, or as
                         frequently as required according to the HRSN Guidance Document, and,
                    {E}(H)      = The MCE, or as applicable, the Authority’s care management team
                         responsible for managing the Member’s HRSN Services.
           (b)   The MCE or, as applicable, the Authority, shall, ata minimum, have as many
                 meetings as may be necessary to develop the PCSP, but in no event less than one
                 meeting with the Member (or the Member’s guardian, or both, as applicable) during
                 development of the PCSP. The meeting with the Member may be held in person, by
                 telephone, or via videoconference.      If efforts to have a meeting are unsuccessful, or if


                                                                                                             62
              the Member declines participation, the MCE or, as applicable, the Authority shall
              document the attempts and barriers to having a meeting, and justification for
              continued provision of HRSN Services. The MCE or, as applicable, the Authority is not
              permitted to deny provision of HRSN Services on the basis of        a Member   not
              participating in the PCSP.
       {e}-A parent, guardian, or caregiver of a ehiied- Member may receive HRSN Service(s) on
              theirebtel’ssuch Member’s behalf if the parent, guardian, or caregiver lives with the
              eAite-Member and it is in the best interest of the   ehtd- Member    as determined
              through the PSCP.
(11)HRSN Provider Qualifications
        (a)   MCEs shall ensure that all contracted HRSN Service Providers meet the specific
              provider qualifications to provide HRSN Services to Members who are authorized by
              the MCEs to receive HRSN Services (HRSN-Authorized Members). Contracted HRSN
              Service Providers must:
        (a)   Be accessible to Members, including having the operating hours and the staff
              necessary to meet the Members’ needs.
        (b)   Demonstrate their ability or experience to effectively serve at least one of OHA’s
              Priority Populations, as defined in ORS 413.042.
        (c)   Demonstrate they employ or contract with administrative and service delivery staff,
              who are, as reasonably determined by the MCE, qualified to perform and fulfill the
              responsibilities of their jobs.
        (d)   Demonstrate they provide culturally and linguistically appropriate, responsive and
              trauma-informed services, which includes the ability to:
                    (A)   Supply (i) language interpretation and translation services to those
                          Members who have limited English proficiency, and (ii) American Sign
                          Language (ASL) services for to those Members who require ASL in order to
                          communicate; and
                    (B)   Respond to the cultural needs of the diverse populations they serve by
                          performing services in accordance with National CLAS Standards.
        (e)   Documented demonstration of a history of responsible financial administration via
              recent annual financial reports, an externally conducted audit, or other similar
              documentation.
        (f)   Meet readiness standards defined by the Authority, including providing the MCE with
              an attestation of their agreement or ability (or both agreement and ability) to comply
              with all of the following:
                    (A)   Reporting and oversight requirements established by the Authority or the
                          MCE or, as applicable, both;
                    (B)   All laws relating to information privacy and security applicable to their
                          business;
                    (C)   Compliance with the credentialing obligations described in OAR 410-141-
                          3510;


                                                                                                      63
             (D) All obligations related to participating in the Closed Loop Referral process
                   (acceptance/denial of referrals and confirmation/incomplete services); and
             (E)   Invoicing for HRSN Services as agreed upon in their contract with the MCE
                   to provide HRSN Services.
(g) Comply with oversight requirements established by the Authority, or the MCE, (or
      both as applicable), and all laws relating to privacy and security that are applicable to
      their business.
(h) Agree to be enrolled as a Medicaid HRSN Service Provider in MMIS, OHA’s electronic
      system that processes Medicaid claims. The MCE may enroll their contracted HRSN
      Service Providers as “encounter only” providers in MMIS.
(i)   It is preferred that MCEs contract with HRSN Service Providers providing Climate-
      Related Supports that are capable of both delivering and installing Climate-Related
      Devices.     In the event an HRSN Service Provider does not provide installation
      services, MCEs shall ensure installation services are also performed by a different
      qualified HRSN Services Provider or HRSN vendor(s).
(i)   MCEs shall ensure that HRSN Service Providers providing HRSN Outreach and
      Engagement Services, assign the responsibility for performing HRSN Outreach and
      Engagement Services to only those staff who have knowledge of principles and
      methods, as well as the experience and skills that enables them to effectively engage
      with individuals who are the intended beneficiaries of HRSN Services for the purpose
      of connecting them to the HRSN Services and other services and supports that          meet
      their needs.
(b)   MCEs and the Authority shall ensure that HRSN Service Providers providing Housing
      Related Supports meet the following domain and service-specific provider
      qualifications:
             (A)   Have knowledge of principles, methods and procedures of the housing
                   services covered under the waiver, or comparable services meant to
                   support an individual in meeting their nutritional   needs.
             (B)   Be trained and credentialed, if applicable, to provide the specific service.
                   CCOs may use discretion in determining the appropriate level of training or
                   licensure required for each contracted provider.
             (C)   Have the ability to directly meet member’s needs for the activities listed in
                   the housing service descriptions or the ability to connect members to the
                   appropriate service provider or vendor. CCOs are expected to develop a
                   broad network of providers to ensure service providers can meet the
                   personal and cultural needs of their communities as appropriate.
             (D)   Housing Service-Specific Provider Qualifications: See Table 3: Housing
                   Service-Specific Provider Qualifications.




                                                                                                  64
(c)   MCEs and the Authority shall ensure that HRSN Service Providers providing Nutrition
      Related Supports meet the following domain and service-specific provider
      qualifications:
             (A)   Have knowledge of principles, methods and procedures of the nutrition
                   services covered under the waiver, or comparable services meant to
                   support an individual in meeting their nutritional      needs.

             (B)   Comply with best practice guidelines, industry standards, and all applicable
                   federal, state, and local laws governing food safety standards.
             (C)   Be trained and accredited, to the extent appropriate based on nutrition
                   industry standards, to provide the specific service. CCOs may use discretion
                   in determining the appropriate      level of training or licensure   required for
                   each contracted provider of      a HRSN nutrition service, as long as they
                   ensure providers will act in accordance with nutrition-related national
                   guidelines, such as the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, or evidence-
                   based practice guidelines for specific chronic diseases and conditions.
                   Depending on the specific service being provided, appropriate training and
                   credentialing may entail:
                             (i)    Relevant training(s) (e.g., webinar courses provided by SNAP-
                                    Ed, CDC-approved training for the National Diabetes
                                    Prevention Program Lifestyle Coach position, or other
                                    trainings from accredited nutrition organizations): or
                             (ii)   Certification (e.g., Certified Nutrition    & Wellness Educator by
                                    the American Association of Family         & Consumer Sciences): or
                             (iii) Licensure (e.g., licensed dietitian).
             (D)   Have the ability to meet the needs of Member’s personal and cultural
                   dietary preferences. CCOs are expected to develop a network of HRSN
                   nutrition providers that, together, are able to serve the personal and
                   cultural needs of their communities, though no one provider must be able
                   to meet all Members’      personal and cultural dietary preferences.
             (E)   Have the capacity to provide services on a one-time, daily, weekly, or
                   monthly basis, depending on the specific service’s permitted frequency and
                   Member’s preference.
             (F)   If a nutrition service is administered through depositing funds
                   electronically to a debit card to be used by the Member, the HRSN Service
                   Provider must have the ability to administer and coordinate the service,
                   including engaging with Members        to explain the service, having
                   relationships with food retailers that will accept payment, and monitoring
                   and overseeing use of the cards.
             (G) Nutrition Service-Specific Provider Qualifications: See Table 26: Nutrition
                   Service-Specific Provider Qualifications.




                                                                                                       65
(2)   MCEs and the Authority must ensure that HRSN Outreach and Engagement service providers
      meet the following domain specific qualifications:
          (a)   Have knowledge of principles, methods, and procedures of these services or
                comparable services meant to outreach to and engage the populations covered
                under the waiver and connect them to benefits and services to meet their needs. and
                Capacity to carry out the responsibilities outlined in the Outreach and Engagement
                service definition. CCOs     may use discretion in determining whether a provider can
                sufficiently provide this service.
          (b)   Have knowledge of the following:
                      (A)   Cultural specificity and responsiveness approaches
                      (B)   Community outreach and engagement best practices
                      (C)   Basic eligibility and enrollment policies and practices for OHP, the HRSN
                            program, and Federal and state entitlements and benefits including SNAP,
                            WIC, TANF, Social Security, Social Security Disability, and Veterans Affairs
                            benefits, and federal and state housing programs.
                      (D)   Local community resources for supporting basic needs such as access to
                            shower, laundry, shelter, and food.
                      (E)   Excellent oral communication    skills with the ability to explain complex
                            information to individuals—including those in the OHA HRSN Priority
                            Populations — in an understandable, trauma-informed, and culturally
                            responsive way.
                      (F)   Ability to maintain strict confidentiality and handle sensitive information
                            appropriately.




(3}(12)




                                                                                                           66
(1)   Rent and Utility   Costs
(a)   Service            Provision of payment to cover         a Member’s costs for recurring rent, including:
      Description        e       Rentpayment
                         e       _Renter’s insurance if required by the lease
                         e__Landlord paid utilities that are not duplicative of the utility payments covered
                                 by this service

                         Contractor/FFS TPC is authorized to pay rent to Members who reside in:
                         e     Apartment units, single room occupancy units, single or multifamily homes
                         e       Mobile home communities
                         e     Accessory dwelling units (ADUs)
                         e       Co-housing communities
                         e       Middle housing types (e.g. duplex, triplex)
                         e__   Trailers, manufactured homes or manufactured home lots
                         e       Permanent supportive housing
                         e       Orother housing with a lease or written agreement


                         Provision of payment to cover         a Member’s cost for the following utilities:
                         e     Garbage
                         e     Water
                         e     Sewage
                         e       Recycling
                         e     Gas
                         e_Electric
                         e       Internet
                                 Phone (inclusive of land line phone service and cell phone service)


                         This service may be tailored in amount to account for a member’s household size.”


(b)   Frequency          Payment may occur based on the billing schedule of the provider and/or vendor
(c)   Duration           e     Recurring Rent Payment: Presumption of, and no longer than, six months.
                               Payment may be for past due rent up to six months, or forward rent for up to
                               six months, or some combination of past due and forward rent.
                         e     Recurring Utility Payment: Not longer than the duration of any forward rent
                               related to the Rent/ service that the Member is receiving.
(d) Setting              N/A
(e)   Additional         e     Costs that are not eligible in this service include:
      Service                       ©   _Pet fees
      Limitations                       Parking garage fees
                                     |O




                                            Amenity fees
                                     |O




                                            Landlord-paid property taxes
                                     |O




                                            Any homeowner costs, including mortgage, utilities or other costs
                                     O




                                     o      Property insurance
                         e     _Anycombination of “Hotel/Motel Stays” and “Rent and Utility Costs” may not
                               exceed a total of six months of assistance.



                                                                                                                 67
                                 Any combination of payment for arrears under “Utilities Arrears” and “Rent
                                 Utility Costs” may not exceed a total of six months.
 (f)   Additional                Rent Payment:
       Requirements                    o    _Member or parent/caregiver must submit either a written lease or the
                                            “Oregon Emergency Rental Assistance Program Verification of
                                            Landlord/Tenant Relationship And Rent Owed” form.’
                                       o    The provider must ensure the residence that       a member is remaining in
                                            is ina safe and habitable living condition based on maintenance
                                            regulation code within the local jurisdiction.‘
                                 Utility Payment: Member or parent/caregiver must submit the bill(s) from the
                                 utility company(ies) to be paid for through this service. The address on the
                                 utility bills must be the same as the address on the lease or self-verification
                                 form.
                           e     Members       receiving this service must also be considered for Tenancy Services.
 (2)   Hotel/Motel Stays
 (a)   Service             Provision of payment to cover        a Member’s costs for hotel or motel stays.
       Description         This service may be tailored in amount to account for a Member’s household size.”
 (b)   Frequency           Payment may occur based on the billing schedule of the provider and/or vendor
 (c)   Duration            Up to three months at which time         a Member   may be reassessed for an additional
                           three months. No longer than a total of six months.
 (d) Setting               N/A
 (e)   Additional          Costs that are not eligible in this service include:
       Service             e     Pet fees
       Limitations         e     Parking fees
                           e   Amenity fees
                           Any combination of “Hotel/Motel Stays” and “Rent and Utility Costs” may not
                           exceed a total of six months of assistance.
 (f)   Additional          Members         receiving this service must also be receiving Tenancy Services.
       Requirements
 (3)   Utilities Arrears
 (a)   Service             This service provides payment for costs related to past-due utility bills for the
       Description         following types of utility services:
                           e     Garbage
                           e     Water
                           e     Sewage
                           e     Recycling
                           e     Gas
                           e_    Electric



? Household as defined by “Family Size” in OAR 410-200-0015
3 Linkto Oregon      Emergency Rental Assistance Verification of Landlord/Tenant Relationship form:
https://oerap.oregon.gov/downloads/programs/orera/04-23-2021-OERAP-no-lease.pdf
Language for safety and habitability drawn from City of Portland Property Maintenance Code
httos://www.portland.gov/code/29
5 Household as defined by “Family Size” in OAR 410-200-0015

                                                                                                                   68
                          e     Internet
                          e     Phone (inclusive of land line phone service and cell phone service)
                          This service may be tailored in amount to account for a member’s household size. 6


 (b)   Frequency          As needed at any point at which         a member meets service specific eligibility criteria.
 (c)   Duration           Any combination of payment for arrears under “Utilities Arrears” and “Rent and
                          Utility Costs” may not exceed a total of six months’ worth of payments.
 (d) Setting              N/A
 (e) Additional           N/A
       Service
       Limitations
 (f)   Additional         e     Member or parent/caregiver must submit the bill(s) from the utility
       Requirements             company(ies) to be paid for through this service.
                          e     lf the Member or parent/caregiver’s name is not on the utility bill, the member
                                or parent/caregiver must submit documentation to verify that the address for
                                service completion is the Member’s primary address or the Member’s most
                                recent prior primary address. The following are accepted forms of residency
                                verification:
                                      co    _Member’s Medicaid address of record;
                                      o     _Asigned lease or written rental agreement;
                                      o__   State issued program ID or license;
                                      o     Official letter from third party showing the member’s name and
                                            residence address (including a letter from a landlord, governmental
                                            agency, financial institution, medical institution, and/or school); or,
                                      o     Government issued library card.
                          e     Members       receiving this service must also be considered for Tenancy Services.
 (4)   Utilities Set Up
 (a)   Service            This service provides payment for non-refundable, non-recurring utility set-up or
       Description        restart costs, and payment for the first month of the utility payment for the
                          following types of utility services:
                          e     Garbage
                          e     Water
                          e     Sewage
                                Recycling
                                Gas
                                Electric
                                Internet
                                Phone (inclusive of land line phone service and cell phone service)
 (b)   Frequency          As needed at any point at which         a Member    meets service specific eligibility criteria
 (c)   Duration           N/A
 (d) Setting              N/A
 (e) Additional           N/A
       Service
       Limitations


6 Household as defined by “Family Size” in OAR 410-200-0015

                                                                                                                      69
 (f)   Additional     e     Member or parent/caregiver must submit the bill(s) from the utility
       Requirements         company(ies) to be paid for through this service.
                      e     lf the Member or parent/caregiver’s name is not on the utility bill, the member
                            or parent/caregiver must submit documentation to verify that the address for
                            service completion is the Member’s primary address. The following are
                            accepted forms of residency verification:
                                  o    _Member’s Medicaid address of record
                                  o_Asigned lease or written rental agreement
                                  o___State issued program ID or license
                                  o   Official letter from third party showing the member’s name and
                                       residence address (including a letter from a landlord, governmental
                                      agency, financial institution, medical institution, and/or school)
                                  o   Government issued library card
                      e     Members      receiving this service must also be considered for Tenancy Services.
 (5)   Storage Fees
 (a)   Service        Storage of personal property to facilitate moving or a transition period so that the
       Description    Member’s belongings may be safely and securely transferred or held until the time
                      at which they are needed. This may include storing the following types of personal
                      property and belongings:
                      e     Appliances
                      e     Furniture
                      e     Bedding
                      e     Clothing
                      e     Identifying documentation
                      This service may be tailored in amount to account for a Member’s household size.’
 (b)   Frequency      Payment may occur based on the billing schedule of the provider and/or vendor
 (c)   Duration       Not to exceed 6 months each time        a Member is eligible for the service
 (d)   Setting        Commercial storage units, including self-storage and portable moving and storage
                      solutions (e.g. PODS, U-Box)
 (e)   Additional     This service does not include storage of items that are not permitted according to
       Service        the storage unit’s policies.
       Limitations
 (f)   Additional     N/A
       Requirements
 (6) Tenancy Services (paid via 15-minute increments)
 (a)   Service        Tenancy services are flexible supports provided to Members or Members’
       Description    households to achieve and maintain their housing stability goals. Members        may
                      receive support for any of the activities listed below, and providers will bill for these
                      services on a fee-for-service basis. These services include:


                      Member Supports Services:
                      e     Working with the member to develop a housing plan that supports the stated
                            needs of the member and/or household to achieve their stability and housing
                            retention goals


7 Household as defined by “Family Size” in OAR 410-200-0015

                                                                                                             70
                  e    Reviewing, updating, and implementing the plan with the member to reflect
                       current needs and preferences and address existing or recurring housing
                       retention barriers
                  e    Asneeded, facilitating enrollment in the local Continuum of Care’s Coordinated
                       Entry System (the standard community-wide process by which individuals and
                       families are connected to housing resources and supports)
                  e_   Assisting in completing housing applications (e.g. rentals, waitlists, housing
                       vouchers, etc.)
                  ee   Assisting in obtaining identification and other required documentation (e.g.,
                       Social Security card, birth certificate, prior rental history)
                  e    Providing training and resources to assist the member in complying with the
                       member’s lease
                  e    Establishing procedures and contacts to retain housing, including developing a
                       housing support crisis plan that includes prevention and early intervention
                       services when housing is jeopardized
                  e    Providing supports to assist the member in developing independent living skills
                       needed to remain housed (e.g., skills to maintain a healthy living environment,
                       develop and manage a household budget, interact appropriately with neighbors
                       or roommates, reduce social isolation, utilize local transportation, etc.)
                  e    Supporting housing stability by facilitating the enrollment of members of the
                       household in local school and college systems
                  e    Coordinating referrals for access to other necessary medical, disability, social,
                       educational, legal, income-related tools and resources for housing, and other
                       services
                  e    Coordinating and assuring the delivery of another HRSN housing service


                  Landlord Engagement Services:
                  e    Engaging and communicating with a Member’s landlord and, when appropriate
                       and as requested by the Member, advocating on behalf of the Member
                  e    Assisting and coaching the Member in communicating with the landlord and
                       property manager


                  CCO/FFS TPC Engagement Services:
                  e    All coordination and information sharing with the CCO/FFS TPC care
                       coordination team
                  e    Service planning support and participating in person-centered plan meetings at
                       redetermination and/or revision plan meetings, as needed
(b)   Frequency   As needed at any point at which    a Member    meets service specific eligibility criteria.
(c)   Duration    Member Supports and CCO Engagement: On average, individuals require 6-18
                  months of case management services to become stably housed but Member needs
                  will vary and may continue beyond the 18-month timeframe. Service duration
                  would persist until services are no longer needed, as determined in the Member’s
                  person-centered care plan, contingent on determination of continued service
                  eligibility.




                                                                                                          71
                     Landlord Engagement: Service duration would persist until services are no longer
                     needed, as determined in the Member’s person-centered care plan, contingent on
                     determination      of continued service eligibility.
(d)   Setting        Member Supports:
                     e      The majority of sessions with members should be in a setting desired by the
                            member.
                     e      Case managers may use telehealth if appropriate and desired by the Member.
                     e      Sessions may be “off-site,” (e.g., at potential housing locations).
(e)   Additional            N/A
      Service
      Limitations
(f)   Additional     e      This service, or the Tenancy Service (PMPM)       must be authorized when any
      Requirements          other HRSN Housing Service is authorized to ensure a housing provider may bill
                            for their time coordinating and delivering the other HRSN        Housing Service.
                     e = Activities listed above may occur with or without the member            present.
(7) Tenancy Service (paid per member per month)
(a)   Service        Tenancy services are flexible supports provided to members or members’
      Description    households to achieve and maintain their housing stability goals. Providers will
                     support eligible Members with all of the activities below, as needed or requested by
                     the Member, and will bill for these services on a per member per month basis.
                     These services include:


                     Member Supports Services:
                     e      Working with the Member to develop a housing plan that supports the stated
                            needs of the member and/or household to achieve their stability and housing
                            retention goals
                     e      Reviewing, updating, and implementing the plan with the Member to reflect
                            current needs and preferences and address existing or recurring housing
                            retention barriers
                     e _ Asneeded, facilitating enrollment in the local Continuum of Care’s Coordinated
                            Entry System (the standard community-wide           process by which individuals
                            and families are connected to housing resources and supports)
                     e      Assisting in completing housing applications (e.g. rentals, waitlists, housing
                            vouchers, etc.)
                     e_ _   Assisting in obtaining identification and other required documentation (e.g.,
                            Social Security card, birth certificate, prior rental history)
                     e      Providing training and resources to assist the Member in complying with the
                            Member’s lease
                     e      Establishing procedures and contacts to retain housing, including developing a
                            housing support crisis plan that includes prevention and early intervention
                            services when housing is jeopardized
                     e      Providing supports to assist the Member in developing independent living skills
                            needed to remain housed (e.g., skills to maintain a healthy living environment,
                            develop and manage a household budget, interact appropriately with neighbors
                            or roommates,     reduce social isolation, utilize local transportation, etc.)

                                                                                                                72
                      e     Supporting housing stability by facilitating the enrollment of Members of the
                            household in local school and college systems
                      e     Coordinating referrals for access to other necessary medical, disability, social,
                            educational, legal, income-related tools and resources for housing, and other
                            services
                      e     Coordinating and assuring the delivery of another HRSN housing service


                      Landlord Engagement Services:
                      e     Engaging and communicating with the Member’s landlord and when
                            appropriate and as requested by the Member, advocating on behalf of the
                            member
                      e     Assisting and coaching the Member in communicating with the landlord and
                            property manager


                      CCO/FFS TPC Engagement Services:
                      e     All coordination and information sharing with the CCO care coordination team
                      e     Service planning support and participating in person-centered plan meetings at
                            redetermination and/or revision plan meetings, as needed
(b)   Frequency       As needed at any point at which      a Member    meets service specific eligibility criteria.
(c)   Duration        Member Supports and CCO Engagement: On average, individuals require 6-18
                      months of case management services to become stably housed but Member needs
                      will vary and may continue beyond the 18-month timeframe. Service duration
                      would persist until services are no longer needed, as determined in the Member’s
                      person-centered care plan, contingent on determination of continued service
                      eligibility.

                      Landlord Engagement: Service duration would persist until services are no longer
                      needed, as determined in the Member’s person-centered care plan, contingent on
                      determination    of continued service eligibility.
(d)   Setting         Member Supports:
                      e     The majority of sessions with Members should be in a setting desired by the
                            Member.
                      e     Case managers may use telehealth if appropriate and desired by the Member.
                      e     Sessions may be “off-site,” (e.g., at potential housing locations).
(e)   Additional      N/A
      Service
      Limitations
(f)   Additional      e__   This service, or the Tenancy Service (15 min) must be authorized when any
      Requirements          other HRSN Housing Service is authorized to ensure a housing provider may bill
                            for their time coordinating and delivering the other HRSN Housing Service.
                      e_    Activities listed above may occur with or without the Member         present.
(8)   Home Modifica tions
(a)   Service         The provision of home modifications to eliminate known home-based              health and
      Description     safety risks and ensure the Member’s living environment can accommodate their




                                                                                                                73
                     functional, health, or safety needs. These services include installation or execution
                     of:
                     e   Ramps, and/or
                     e   Grip bars, and/or
                     e     Doorand cabinet handles for members           having difficulty due to dexterity issues.
(b)   Frequency      N/A
(c)   Duration       N/A
(d)   Setting        Home    modification services occur in the Member’s current place of residence or
                     potential residence.
(e)   Additional     The following are excluded from this service:
      Service        e     Accessibility modifications, adaptations, or improvements to the home that are
      Limitations          not directly related to the known home-based         health and safety risks for the
                           purpose of ensuring the members’ health and safety in the living environment
                           and that are completed exclusively for preference, design, or style. Examples of
                           these types of modifications include installations, repairs or updates related to:
                               o      Roof
                               o__    Appliances
                               o___   Heating and cooling
                               o___   Skylights and windows
                               o      Hot water tanks
                     e     Adaptations that add to the total square footage of the home.
                     e     General repair or maintenance and upkeep required for the home.
                     e     Modifications that substitute for or duplicate modifications that are the
                           responsibility of a landlord under landlord-tenant laws.
                     e     Material upgrades or supplemental payments to the provider by landlords or
                           informal supports.
(f)   Additional     e     ifthe CCO or housing provider is contracting with a vendor to execute the
      Requirements         modification, the CCO or housing provider must have a procurement process in
                           place that:
                                      o      Determines the scope of work to meet the Member’s need; and,
                                      o      Identifies one or more qualified vendors that can execute the
                                             modification timely and at a reasonable cost, meeting the
                                             Member’s needs and preferences to the maximum        extent possible.
                     e     Before a home accessibility modification service begins, the landlord must
                           provide written consent to the service.
                     e     ifthe proposed home accessibility modification requires a permit, the proposal
                           must be in compliance with local codes.
                     e     Members        receiving this service must also be considered for Tenancy Services if
                           they may meet the eligibility for those services.
(9)   Home Remedia tions
(a)   Service        The provision of medically necessary home remediation services to eliminate known
      Description    home-based health and safety risks and ensure the member’s health and safety in
                     the living environment. These services include:
                     e     Pest eradication, and/or


                                                                                                                  74
                      e    Installation of washable curtains or synthetic blinds to prevent allergens, and/or
                      e    Chore services, inclusive of the following:
                               o     Heavy housecleaning to ensure the member can safely navigate in the
                                     home, and/or
                               o     Removal of hazardous waste, debris, or dirt from the home, and/or
                               o     Removal of yard hazards to ensure the outside of the home is safe for
                                     the consumer to enter and exit the home,
(b)   Frequency       As often as is medically necessary to eliminate known home-based            health and
                      safety risks
(c)   Duration       N/A
(d)   Setting         Home    remediation services occur in the member’s current place of residence.
(e)   Additional      e__The following are excluded from this service:
      Service                o   _Remediations to the home that are not directly related to eliminating
      Limitations                known home-based health and safety risks and ensure the members’
                                     health and safety in the living environment.
                               o   _Remediations that add to the total square footage of the home.
                                   General repair or maintenance and upkeep required for the home.
                              .@)




                               o   _Remediations that substitute for or duplicate remediations that are the
                                   responsibility of a landlord under landlord-tenant laws.
                               o__Material upgrades or supplemental payments to the provider by
                                   landlords or informal supports.
                      e    Chore services must be intended to ensure the member’s home is safe and
                           allows for independent living and may not be provided by homecare workers or
                           in-home agencies. Chore services do not include:
                                o   General housekeeping
                                o   Removal of debris that does not impede the member from safely
                                    traversing within the home; or entering or exiting the home safely
                               o     Removing items that do not present a potential fire hazard that would
                                     endanger the consumer's health and safety
(f)   Additional      e    lf the CCO or housing provider is contracting with a vendor to execute the
      Requirements         remediation, the CCO or housing provider must have a procurement process in
                           place that:
                                 o  Determines the scope of work to meet the member’s need; and,
                                 o  Identifies one or more qualified vendors that can execute the
                                    remediation timely and at a reasonable cost, meeting the member's
                                    needs and preferences to the maximum extent possible.
                      e    Before a home remediation service begins, the landlord must provide written
                           consent to the service.
                      e    lf the proposed home remediation requires a permit, the proposal must be in
                           compliance with local codes.
                      e    Members     receiving this service must also be considered for Tenancy Services if
                           they may meet the eligibility for those services.



Table 2: HRSN Housing Eligibility Criteria
(a)   Service        (b)   Covered Population&          (c)   Clinical   (d)   Additional Eligibility
                           Social Risk Factor                 Risk             Requirements

                                                                                                               79
(1)   Rent and        Member must:                     Any HRSN         Members        must be receiving recurring
      Utility Costs   |e   Becurrently housed with | Housing and | rent to be eligible for recurring
                           a written agreement or      Nutrition         utilities.
(2)   Hotel/Motel          lease; and,                 Clinical Risk   | Members must be receiving the
      Stays           e    Need support                Factor            Home Modifications or Home
                           maintaining current                          Remediations service and during the
                           housing; and,                                delivery of the service the member
                      e    Meet the At-Risk of                          cannot safely reside in their home.
(3) Utility                Homelessness definition                      N/A
      Arrears              in OAR 410-120-0000.
(4)   Utilities Set                                                     Members receiving the Rent and
      Up                                                                Utility Costs service are not eligible
                                                                        for the first month of utility payment
                                                                        under this service.
(5)   Storage Fees                                                      Members        must be receiving the Rent
                                                                        and Utility Costs service.
(6)   Tenancy (15                                                       Members        receiving this service may
      min)                                                              not concurrently receive Tenancy
                                                                        (PMPM).
(7)   Tenancy                                                           Members receiving this service may
      (PMPM)                                                            not concurrently receive Tenancy (15
                                                                        min).
(8)   Home            Member must:                                      e     Member must reside in a housing
      Modifications        Require the clinically                             unit that does not accommodate
                           appropriate home                                   their functional, health, or safety
                           modification or                                    needs.
(9)   Home                 remediation, and                             e     Member must reside in a housing
      Remediations         Be in a HRSN Covered                               unit that has mutable conditions
                           Population, including:                             that adversely affect their health
                           e   Adults and Youth                               or safety.
                               Discharged from an
                               Institution for
                               Mental Diseases
                               (IMD); or,
                           e   Adults and Youth
                               Released from
                               Incarceration; or,
                           e   Individuals currently
                               or previously
                               involved in Oregon’s
                               Child Welfare
                               system; or,
                           e   Individuals
                               Transitioning to Dual
                               Medicaid and
                               Medicare Status; or,



                                                                                                               76
                          e         Individuals who
                                    meet the definition
                                    of “HUD Homeless”
                                    as defined in OAR
                                    410-120-0000; or
                          e         Individuals who
                                    meet the At-Risk of
                                    Homeless definition
                                    in OAR 410-120-
                                    0000; or,
                          e         Youth with Special
                                    Health Care Needs,
                                    as defined in OAR
                                    410-120-0000.




(1)   Rent and Utility        HRSN provider must be able to transmit payments to housing and utility
      Costs                   vendors in a timely manner.


(2)   Hotel/Motel Stays       HRSN provider must be able to transmit payments to housing vendors ina
                              timely manner.
(3)   Utility Arrears         HRSN provider must be able to transmit payments to utility vendors in a timely
                              manner.
(4)   Utilities Set Up        HRSN provider must be able to transmit payments to utility vendors in a timely
                              manner.
(5)   Storage Fees            N/A
(6)   Tenancy Service         e      Providers that deliver the Tenancy Service via the 15-min payment
      (paid via 15-                  methodology may not receive reimbursement under the Tenancy Service
      minute                         (PMPM).
      increments)
                              e     Providers must be able to offer any one or more the activities in the service
                                    description.
(7)   Tenancy Service         e      Providers that deliver the Tenancy Service via the PMPM     methodology may
      (paid per member               not receive reimbursement under the Tenancy Service (15-min).
      per month)              e      Providers receiving   a PMPM   payment on behalf of a member must be able
                                    to provide all services listed within the service description.
(8)   Home                    Vendors of home modification services must:
      Modifications                 e    _Bestate-licensed, and
                                    e    Have active status and be in good-standing with the State of Oregon
                                         Construction Contractors Board.
(9)   Home                    Vendors of home remediation services must be state-licensed.
      Remediations




                                                                                                               77
(10)       Assessment for Medically Tailored Meals
(a)    Service           Initial assessment with a Registered Dietitian Nutritionist (RDN) (preferred), or, if
       Description      not available, a primary care provider, to develop a medically appropriate nutrition
                        care plan specific to the HRSN Medically Tailored Meals service. This service also
                        covers a reassessment, if needed, to understand whether the delivery of the
                        service is meeting the Member’s needs.
(b)    Frequency         Initial assessment will take place once before the provision of the HRSN service
                         Medically Tailored Meals. A reassessment may take place within a 6 month period.
(c)    Duration         Service persists until the Member is no longer receiving the Medically Tailored
                        Meal service.
(d)    Setting          Assessments and reassessments may be conducted in-person, via telehealth, or
                        telephonically, at the Member’s preference.
(e) Additional          N/A
       Service
       Limitations
(11)       Medically Tailored Meals
(a)    Service           Meals tailored to support Members with health-related condition(s) for which
       Description       nutrition supports would improve health outcomes. This service includes:
                              1. The preparation and provision of the prescribed meals consistent with the
                                  nutrition care plan; and
                              2. Delivery of the meal.

                         Each meal must contain sufficient food to support approximately one-third of a
                         Member’s daily nutritional need as indicated by the Dietary Reference Intakes and
                         Dietary Guidelines. The meal may also include an accompanying fluid/drink and/or
                        a supplementary food item to support meeting a Member’s nutrition needs
                        between meals if medically appropriate (for example, to provide access to fluids
                        and/or support taking medication accompanied by food).

                         Meals may consist of fresh or frozen food.

                        The service must:
                        —Be provided in accordance with nutrition-related national guidelines, such as
                            the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, or evidence-based practice guidelines for
                            specific chronic diseases and conditions;


                        —Follow food safety standards; and


                        e     Consider a Member’s personal and cultural dietary preferences.
(b)    Frequency        Up to 3 meals per day, for up to 7 days per week, based on the Member’s needs
                        and preferences.
(c)    Duration          Up to 6 months, at which time the Member may be reassessed for service
                        eligibility.
(d)    Setting           Meals must be delivered to the Member’s home or private residence.




                                                                                                           78
 (e)    Additional        Frozen meals may only be authorized for Members with appropriate storage
        Service           capabilities that will keep meals frozen until they are ready for consumption.
        Limitations
 (12)       Pantry Stocking
 (a)    Service           This service allows    a Member to purchase an assortment of foods aimed at
        Description       promoting improved nutrition for the Member.

                          Examples of allowable foods include:
                               e     Fruits and vegetables;
                               e     Meat, poultry, fish, and other proteins;
                               e     Legumes;
                               e__   Dairy products;
                               e     _Breads and cereals;
                               e     Cooking oils, spices and herbs;
                               e     Other foods such as snack foods and non-alcoholic beverages; and
                               e     Seeds and plants, which produce food for the household to eat.

                          This service may be:
                               e     Tailored in size/amount to account for     a Member’s household size;®
                               e     Administered through, for example, a voucher or prepaid card to be used
                                     only with a food retailer for allowable purchases; and
                               e     Provided in conjunction with resources on the Dietary Guidelines for
                                     Americans to encourage healthy food selection.

                          This service must:
                               e     Be provided in accordance with evidence-based nutrition guidelines;
                               e     Follow food safety standards; and
                               e     Beperson-centered, consider dietary preferences, and be culturally
                                     appropriate.
 (b)    Frequency         Funds to support the food purchases may be provided to the Member ona
                          recurring weekly or monthly basis depending on the provider’s offering and
                          Member’s preference.

                          If provided on a weekly basis, funds may be provided a maximum of four times per
                          month. If provided monthly, funds may be provided a maximum of once per
                          month.
 (c)    Duration          Up to 6 months, at which time the Member may be reassessed for service
                          eligibility.
 (d)    Setting                e     Members may purchase food with standard food retailers, which may
                                     include but are not limited to grocery stores, convenience stores, farmers
                                     markets, mobile markets, and community-supported agriculture (CSA)
                                     programs.
                               e     Member may pick up food from food retailer or have food delivered to the
                                     Member’s home or private residence, if delivery service is available.



8 The State is adhering t o the SNAP definition of     a household as defined in OAR 461-110-0210.

                                                                                                              79
 (e)    Additional             e     Service cannot be used to purchase the following items:
        Service                           o  Beer, wine, liquor, cigarettes, or tobacco;
        Limitations                       o  Vitamins, medicines, and supplements. If an item has a
                                             Supplement Facts label, it is considered a supplement and is not
                                             eligible for HRSN purchase;
                                         o   Live animals (except shellfish, fish removed from water, and
                                             animals slaughtered prior to pick-up from the store);
                                         o   Foods that are hot at the point of sale;
                                         o   Any nonfood items such as:
                                                 =   Pet foods;
                                                 =   Cleaning supplies, paper products, and other household
                                                       supplies; and
                                                 =»    Hygiene items or cosmetics.
                               e__   This service is intended to wrap around existing nutrition assistance
                                     programs at the local, state, and federal level (e.g., SNAP or WIC) that
                                     Members may already be receiving and should be tailored to address any
                                     remaining gap in need. For Members not receiving any other nutrition
                                     assistance, this service is intended to cover up to approximately 80% of a
                                     Member’s dietary intake as based on the USDA Thrifty Food Plan.
 (13)       Meals
 (a)    Service          This service allows for the purchase of prepared hot foods, meal kits, or restaurant
        Description       meals in supplement to HRSN Pantry Stocking for Members who require additional
                         food supports, in particular for but not limited to supporting Members’
                          engagement with healthcare or other supportive services. This service may also be
                          provided in place of HRSN Pantry Stocking for Members who do not have the
                          means to prepare or store groceries (e.g., Members who are unhoused).


                         This service may be:
                               e     Tailored in size/amount to account for    a Member’s household size;?
                               e     Administered through, for example, a voucher or prepaid card to be used
                                     only with a food retailer for allowable purchases; and
                               e     Provided in conjunction with resources on the Dietary Guidelines for
                                     Americans to encourage healthy food selection.

                         This service must:
                               e     Be provided in accordance with evidence-based nutrition guidelines;
                               e     Follow food safety standards; and
                               e      Beperson-centered, consider dietary preferences, and be culturally
                                     appropriate.
 (b)    Frequency        e     When service is provided in place of HRSN Pantry Stocking, Members may
                               receive up to 3 meals per day.
                         e     When service is provided as a supplement to HRSN        Pantry Stocking, Members
                               may receive up to 2 meals per day.
 (c)    Duration          Up to 6 months, at which time the Member may be reassessed for service
                          eligibility.


° The State is adhering to the SNAP definition of     a household as defined in OAR 461-110-0210.

                                                                                                             80
 (d)    Setting          e    Service may be provided by any restaurant, prepared hot food retailer (for
                              example, a grocery store with a prepared hot food bar), or meal kit service
                              provider.
                         e    Member may pick up food from food retailer or have food delivered to the
                              Member’s home or private residence, if delivery service is available.
 (e)    Additional            e     Service cannot be used to purchase the following items:
        Service                          o  Permitted foods as defined under the HRSN Pantry Stocking
        Limitations                         service;
                                            Beer, wine, liquor, cigarettes, or tobacco;
                                            Vitamins, medicines, and supplements. If an item has a
                                            Supplement Facts label, it is considered a supplement and Is not
                                            eligible for HRSN purchase;
                                        o   Live animals (except shellfish, fish removed from water, and
                                            animals slaughtered prior to pick-up from the store);
                                        o   Any nonfood items such as:
                                                 =     Pet foods;
                                                 =     Cleaning supplies, paper products, and other household
                                                       supplies; and
                                                 =     Hygiene items or cosmetics.
                              e__   This service is intended to wrap around existing nutrition assistance
                                    programs at the local, state, and federal level (e.g., SNAP or WIC) that
                                    Members may already be receiving and should be tailored to address any
                                    remaining gap in need. For Members not receiving any other nutrition
                                    assistance, this service is intended to support coverage of up to
                                    approximately 80% of a Member’s dietary intake as based on the USDA
                                    Thrifty Food Plan.
 (14)       Fruit and Vegetable Benefit
 (a)    Service           This service allows    a Member to purchase fruits and vegetables from participating
        Description       food retailers and farms. Fruits and vegetables available for purchase through this
                          service may be fresh, frozen, dried, or canned. Herbs are also included.


                          This service may be:
                              e     Tailored in size/amount to account for a Member’s household size’? if the
                                    Member is a child under 21, YSHCN, or pregnant;
                              e     Administered through, for example, a voucher or prepaid card to be used
                                    only ata food retailer for allowable purchases; and
                              e     Provided in conjunction with resources on the Dietary Guidelines for
                                    Americans to encourage healthy food selection.

                          This service must:
                              e     Be tailored to health risk, certain nutrition-sensitive health conditions, and
                                    or/demonstrated outcome improvement;
                              e     Be provided in accordance with evidence-based nutrition guidelines;
                              e     Follow food safety standards; and


10 The State is adheringto the SNAP definition of      a household as defined in OAR 461-110-0210.

                                                                                                              81
                               e     Beperson-centered, consider dietary preferences, and be culturally
                                     appropriate.
(b)    Frequency          Funds to support the food purchases may be provided to the Member ona
                          recurring weekly or monthly basis depending on the provider’s offering and
                          Member’s preference.

                          If provided on a weekly basis, funds may be provided a maximum of four times per
                          month. If provided monthly, funds may be provided a maximum of once per
                          month.
(c)    Duration           Up to 6 months, at which time the Member may be reassessed for service
                          eligibility.
(d)    Setting                 e     This service can be used to purchase eligible items from food retailers
                                     including but not limited to grocery stores, farmers markets, farm stands,
                                     mobile markets, and community-supported agriculture (CSA) programs.
                               e     Member may pick up food from food retailer or have food delivered to
                                     where the Member resides, if delivery service is available.
(e)    Additional              e__   This service is limited solely to the purchase of qualifying fruits,
       Service                       vegetables, and culinary herbs as outlined in the service description. It
       Limitations                   does not cover any foods that are not commonly understood to fall within
                                     these food categories (e.g., meat, poultry, and fish; dairy products; breads
                                     and cereals).
                               e__   This service is intended to wrap around existing nutrition assistance
                                     programs at the local, state, and federal level (e.g., SNAP or WIC) that
                                     Members may already be receiving and should be tailored to address any
                                     remaining gap in need. For Members not receiving any other nutrition
                                     assistance, this service is intended to cover up to approximately 80% of a
                                     Member’s fruit and vegetable intake.


(15)       Nutrition Edt ication
(a)    Service            Any combination of educational strategies designed to motivate and facilitate
       Description        voluntary adoption of food choices and other food- and nutrition-related
                          behaviors conducive to health and well-being.


                          This service may consist of the following:
                               1.    Provision of nutrition education or information to an individual or group
                                     that offers evidence-based or evidence-informed strategies on adoption of
                                     food choices and other food- and nutrition-related behaviors conducive to
                                     health and well-being and guidance on food and nutrition resources;
                               2.    Meal preparation education in an individual or group setting.


                          Nutrition education services may be supplemented with handouts, take-home
                          materials, and other informational resources that support nutritional health and
                          well-being. Distribution of these paper and electronic handouts, materials and
                          products, by themselves, does not constitute nutrition education.


                          This service must:


                                                                                                              82
                               e    Be provided in accordance with evidence-based nutrition guidelines;
                               e    Follow food safety standards; and
                               e   Beperson-centered, consider dietary preferences, and be culturally
                                   appropriate.
(b)   Frequency            Variable — may be provided one-time or ona    recurring weekly or monthly basis
                           dependent on the specific service, provider's offering, and Member’s preference.
(c)   Duration             Service duration would persist until services are no longer needed.
(d)   Setting              Service may be offered:
                               e    _In-person, virtually, or telephonically dependent on the specific service
                                   and Member’s preference;
                               e   Where the Member resides; or
                               e    Incommunity settings, e.g., YMCAs, schools, health clinics, transitional
                                    housing shelters, emergency housing shelters, and community kitchens.
(e)   Additional           Members     receiving any other HRSN           nutrition service must also be offered
      Service              Nutrition Education, and receipt of Nutrition Education shall not be conditioned on
      Limitations          engagement       in other HRSN   nutrition services.



Table 5: HRSN Nutrition Eligibility Criteria
(a)   Service        (b)    Covered                fa}(c)       Clinic   | (d)   Social   (e)   Additional Eligibility
                           Population                   al Risk                  Risk           Requirements
(1) Assessment      | Member must be ina | Any HRSN                         Low Food      e     Member must be eligible
      for Medically | HRSN Covered                  Housing and          | Security as          for the HRSN Medically
      Tailored       Population (OAR                Nutrition              defined in           Tailored Meals service.
      Meals          a                              Clinical Risk          OAR 410-
(2) Medically        ©      Adults and Youth        Factor as               120-0000      e     Member must first be
      Tailored              Discharged from | defined in                                        assessed through the
      Meals                 an Institution for    | OAR 410-120-                                HRSN   Assessment for
                            Mental Diseases      | 0000                                         Medically Tailored Meals
                            (IMD); or                                                           service to develop a
                                                                                                medically appropriate
                     e      Adults and Youth
                                                                                                nutrition care plan for this
                            Released from
                                                                                                service.
                            Incarceration; or,
                                                                                          e     Members may receive
                     e      Individuals
                                                                                                more than one HRSN
                            currently or
                                                                                                Nutrition Support service
                              reviousl
                                                                                                as long as services are not
                            involved   in
                                                                                                duplicative and, when
                            Oregon’s Child
                                                                                                combined, do not provide
                            Welfare system;
                                                                                                services beyond
                           or,
                                                                                                addressing a member's
                     e     Individuals
                                                                                                unique needs; however:
                           Transitioning to
                                                                                                o Members receiving 3
                           Dual Medicaid
                                                                                                    HRSN Medically
                                                                                                   Tailored Meals per day



                                                                                                                          83
                 and Medicare            may not concurrently
                 Status; or              receive HRSN:
                 Individuals who         = Pantry Stocking;
                 meet the                =   Meals; or
                 definition of           =   Fruit and Vegetable
                 “HUD Homeless”              Benefit.
                 as defined in       o   Members receiving 3
                 OAR 410-120-            HRSN Meals per day
                 0000; or,               may not concurrently
                 Individuals who         receive HRSN Medically
                 meet the “At-           Tailored Meals.
                                     Members that reside in an
                 Riskof
                                     institutional setting that is
                 Homeless”
                                     obligated to provide its
                 definition in OAR
                                     residents with meals are
                 410-120-0000; or    not eligible for this
                 Individuals         service.
(3)   Pantry     identified as       Member must be:
      Stocking   Young Adults        o Child under 21;
                 with Special        o _YSHCN (OAR 410-120-
                 Health Care             0000); or
                 Needs (YSHCN).      o   Pregnant    Member.
                                     Members may receive
                                     more than one HRSN
                                     Nutrition Support service
                                     as long as services   are   not
                                     duplicative and, when
                                     combined, do not provide
                                     services beyond
                                     addressing a Member’s
                                     unique needs; however:
                                     o Members may not
                                        concurrently receive
                                        the HRSN Pantry
                                        Stocking service and:
                                         = Fruit and Vegetable
                                            Benefit;
                                         = 3 HRSN Medically
                                            Tailored Meals per
                                            day; or
                                         — _ 3 HRSN Meals per
                                            day.
                                     Members that reside in an
                                     institutional setting that is
                                     obligated to provide its
                                     residents with meals are




                                                                 84
                    not eligible for this
                    service.
(4) Meals         Member must be:
                o    Child under 21;
                o    _YSHCN (OAR 410-120-
                        0000); or
                o       Pregnant Member.
                    Members may receive
                    more than one HRSN
                    Nutrition Support service
                    as long as services are not
                    duplicative and, when
                    combined, do not provide
                    services beyond
                    addressing a Member’s
                    unique needs; however:
                    o Members receiving 3
                        HRSN Meals per day
                        may not concurrently
                        receive HRSN:
                        = Medically Tailored
                           Meals;
                        = Pantry Stocking; or
                        = Fruit and Vegetable
                           Benefit.
                    o Members receiving 3
                        HRSN Medically
                       Tailored Meals per day
                        may not concurrently
                        receive HRSN Meals.
                    Members that reside in an
                    institutional setting that is
                    obligated to provide its
                    residents with meals are
                    not eligible for this
                    service.
(5) Fruit and       Members may receive
    Vegetable       more than one HRSN
    Benefit         Nutrition Support service
                    as long as services are not
                    duplicative and, when
                    combined, do not provide
                    services beyond
                    addressing a Member’s
                    unique needs; however:
                    o   Members may not
                        concurrently receive


                                               85
                                                                                        the HRSN Fruit and
                                                                                        Vegetable Benefit
                                                                                        service and:
                                                                                        =    Pantry Stocking;
                                                                                        =»   3 HRSN Medically
                                                                                             Tailored Meals per
                                                                                             day; or
                                                                                        =»   3 HRSN Meals per
                                                                                             day.
                                                                               e     Members that reside in an
                                                                                     institutional setting that is
                                                                                     obligated to provide its
                                                                                     residents with meals are
                                                                                     not eligible for this
                                                                                     service.
(6) Nutrition                                                                  N/A
      Education



Table 6: Nutrition Service-Specific Provider Qualifications
(1)   Assessment for        HRSN provider must be licensed as a:
      Medically Tailored    e   Licensed dietitian (ORS 691.405) who has received licensure through one
      Meals                     of the pathways described in OAR 834-030-0000; or
                            e   Primary care provider (OAR 410-141-3500).

(2)   Medically Tailored            HRSN provider must be able to provide one meal per day, for five or
      Meals                         more days per week, except in rural areas where such frequency is
                                    not feasible and a lesser frequency is approved by the MCE or
                                    Authority.
                                         o      MCE or Authority must ensure sufficient HRSN providers to
                                                meet all enrolled Members’   needs, including those that are
                                                authorized for more frequent service delivery than the
                                                minimum   requirements.

(3)   Pantry Stocking       HRSN provider must have the ability to administer and coordinate the service,
                            including engaging with Members       to explain the service, having relationships
                            with food retailers that will accept payment, and monitoring and overseeing
                            use of the cards.
(4)   Meals                         Restaurant meal providers must be licensed by the appropriate city or
                                    county jurisdiction and maintain health and safety permits as
                                    required by state law.
                                    HRSN provider must have the ability to administer and coordinate the
                                    service, including engaging with members to explain the service,
                                    having relationships with food retailers that will accept payment, and
                                    monitoring and overseeing use of the cards.


                                                                                                              86
(5)   Fruit and Vegetable   HRSN provider must have the ability to administer and coordinate the service,
      Benefit               including engaging with members          to explain the service, having relationships
                            with food retailers that will accept payment, and monitoring and overseeing
                            use of the cards.
(6)   Nutrition Education   MCE and the Authority may contract with HRSN providers to provide this
                            service and are also encouraged to support their existing network of
                            providers (including peer support specialists, traditional health workers, case
                            managers, primary care providers, dental providers, and other individuals
                            with regular Member touchpoints) to receive appropriate training and
                            credentialing to provide this service to Members.


                            Depending on the specific component of this service being provided,
                            appropriate training and credentialing may entail:

                                  e     Relevant training(s) (e.g., webinar courses provided by SNAP-Ed, CDC-
                                        approved training for the National Diabetes Prevention Program
                                        Lifestyle Coach position, or other trainings from accredited nutrition
                                        organizations):
                                  e     Certification (e.g., Certified Nutrition & Wellness Educator by the
                                        American Association of Family      & Consumer Sciences); or
                                  e     Licensure (e.g., licensed dietitian).


                            MCE       may use discretion in determining the appropriate     level of training or
                            licensure required for each contracted provider of this service.




                                                                                                               87
(a)   Service       HRSN Outreach and Engagement Services means the activities performed by HRSN
      Description   Service Providers or Contractor for the purpose of identifying OHP enrolled
                    individuals in HRSN Covered Populations who are presumed to have a qualifying
                    HRSN Clinical Risk Factor and HRSN Social Risk Factor for the purpose of helping
                    them connect to needed HRSN Services and other social services and supports.

                    Payment for HRSN Outreach and Engagement Services, are conditioned on the MCE,
                    the Authority , as applicable, HRSN Service Providers performing and documenting
                    ata minimum, all of the activities specified in (a) —(.c) below_and may also include
                    the activities specified in. (d)-(j) below, as follows:

                            a.    Engaging individuals who belong to one or more HRSN Covered
                                  Populations who may be eligible for HRSN Services. Engagement
                                  activities may use multiple strategies, , including, without limitation,
                                  meeting Members in person where they live, seek care, or are
                                  otherwise   accessible;

                            b.    Identifying and verifying the individual’s CCO enrollment.

                            c.    Transmitting   HRSN    Requests to the applicable CCO for eligibility
                                  determination and service authorization.

                            d.    Working with Members to obtain the information necessary for
                                  assessment of HRSN        service need, including through   multiple
                                  engagements.

                            e.    Helping Members       maintain enrollment in Medicaid.

                            f.    Helping Members, with securing and maintaining entitlements and
                                  benefits, such as TANF, WIC, SNAP, and other federal and state housing
                                  programs including through application assistance and providing
                                  support in identifying coverage for application fees, as necessary.

                            g.    Assisting Members, with       obtaining identification and other required
                                  documentation needed to receive benefits and other supports, e.g.,
                                  Social Security card, birth certificate, prior rental history.

                            h.    Connecting Members, to settings where basic needs can be met, such
                                  as access to shower, laundry, shelter, and food.

                            i.    Providing Members, who may have a need for medical, peer, social,
                                  educational, legal, and other related services with information and
                                  logistical support necessary to connect to resources.

(b)   Frequency     HRSN Service Providers contracted to provide HRSN Outreach and Engagement, can
                    be compensated for conducting HRSN Outreach and Engagement Services to
                    Members up to a maximum of twenty (20) hours per Member per year starting in
                    2025 in accordance with the HRSN Fee Schedule. There must be an exceptions
                    process to allow Members to receive additional hours of HRSN Outreach and
                    Engagement.

(c)   Duration      N/A
(d) Setting         N/A


                                                                                                              88
(e) Additional         N/A
      Service
      Limitations
(f)   Additional       N/A
      Requirements



                         Table 8: HRSN Outreach and Engagement Eligibility Criteria
(a) Covered Population                               (b) Clinical Risk        (c) Social Risk
Individual must be presumed to be ina HRSN           Individual must be       Individual must be
Covered Population (OAR 410-120-0000),               presumed to have any | presumed to have any HRSN
including:                                           HRSN Clinical Risk     Social Risk Factor, as defined
e     Adults and Youth Discharged from an
                                                     Factor as defined in     in OAR 410-120-0000
      Institution for Mental Diseases (IMD); or,
                                                     OAR 410-120-0000
e     Adults and Youth Released from
      Incarceration; or,
e     Individuals currently or previously involved
      in Oregon’s Child Welfare system; or,
e     Individuals Transitioning to Dual Medicaid
      and Medicare Status; or,
e     Individuals who meet the definition of
      “HUD Homeless” as defined in OAR 410-
      120-0000; or,
e     Individuals who meet the “At-Risk of
      Homeless” definition in OAR 410-120-0000;
      or
e     Individuals identified as Young Adults with
      Special Health Care Needs (YSHCN).




                                                                                                      89
OAR 410-141-3510: Provider Contracting and Credentialing


Provider Contracting and Credentialing


      {4)(3)   | Managed Care Entity’s (MCEs) shall develop policies and procedures for credentialing
           providers to include quality standards and a process to remove providers from their provider
           network if they fail to meet the objective quality standards.
               (a) MCEs shall ensure that all participating providers as defined in OAR 410-141-3500
                     providing coordinated care services to members are credentialed upon initial
                     contract with the MCE and re-credentialed no less frequently than every three (3)
                     years. The credentialing and re-credentialing process shall include review of any
                     information in the National Practitioners Databank. MCEs shall accept both the
                     Oregon Practitioner Credentialing Application and the Oregon Practitioner
                     Recredentialing Application;
               (b)   MCEs shall screen their participating providers to be in compliance with 42 CFR 455
                     Subpart E (42 CFR 455.410 through 42 CFR 455.470) and retain all resulting
                     documentation for audit purposes, except in the following circumstances for
                     credentialing COVID-19 vaccine administration providers for the sole purpose of
                     administering COVID-19 vaccines or the administration of the flu vaccine when
                     administered in conjunction with the COVID-19 vaccination. For the purpose of this
                     rule, COVID-19 vaccination administration provider means a healthcare provider that
                     has successfully enrolled with the Authority’s Public Health Division to be a COVID-19
                     vaccination administration provider, completed all required training, and has agreed
                     to all terms of program participation.
                           (A) MCEs may rely upon the most recent weekly update of the Authority’s
                                 active file of vaccine administration providers to meet contractual and
                                 regulatory requirements for credentialing COVID-19 vaccine administration
                                 providers.
                           (B)   MCEs may enroll COVID-19 vaccine administration providers who are
                                 included in the Authority’s most recent active file of vaccine administration
                                 providers.
                           (C) MCEs shall monitor changes in the Authority's weekly active file of vaccine
                                 administration providers for terminations and changes.
               (c)   MCEs shall screen their contracted HRSN Service Providers to be in compliance with
                     42 CFR §§ 455.410 through 455.436, 455.450, 455.452, and 455.470, and retain all
                     resulting documentation for audit purposes.
               (d)   MCEs may elect to contract for or delegate responsibility for the credentialing and
                     screening processes; however, MCEs shall be solely and ultimately responsible for
                     adhering with all terms and conditions held in its contract with the state. For the
                     following activities including oversight of the following processes regardless of
                     whether the activities are provided directly, contracted, or delegated, MCEs shall:


                                                                                                            90
               (A) Ensure that coordinated care services are provided within the scope of
                   license or certification of the participating provider or facility and within
                   the scope of the participating provider’s contracted services. They shall
                   ensure participating providers are appropriately supervised according to
                   their scope of practice;
               (B) Provide training for MCE staff and participating providers and their staff
                   regarding the delivery of coordinated care services, applicable
                   administrative rules, and the MCEs administrative policies.
(e)   The MCE shall provide accurate and timely information to the Authority about:
         (A)    License or certification expiration and renewal dates;
         (B)   Whether a provider’s license or certification is expired or not renewed or is
               subject to licensing termination, suspension, or certification sanction;
         (C)    If an MCE knows or has reason to know that a provider has been convicted of
                a felony or misdemeanor related to a crime or violation of federal or state
                laws under Medicare, Medicaid, or Title XIX (including a plea of “nolo
                contendere”);
         (D) If an MCE removes a provider or fails to renew a provider’s contract if the
                provider fails to meet objective quality standards.
(f)   MCEs may not refer members to or use providers that:
         (A)    Have been terminated from Medicaid;
         (B)    Have been excluded as a Medicaid provider by another state;
         (C)    Have been excluded as Medicare/Medicaid providers by CMS; or
         (D) Are subject to exclusion for any lawful conviction by a court for which the
                provider may be excluded under 42 CFR 1001.101.
(g)   MCEs may not accept billings for services to members provided after the date of the
      provider’s exclusion, conviction, or termination. MCEs shall recoup any monies paid
      for services to members provided after the date of the provider’s exclusion,
      conviction, or termination;
(h)   MCEs shall require each atypical provider to be enrolled with the Authority.            -MCEs
      shall also require each atypical provider, except HRSN Service Providers, unless that
      HRSN Service Provider is a licensed and credentialed and Medicaid billable
      professional, to obtain and use registered National Provider Identifiers (NPIs), and
      taxonomy codes reported to the Authority in the Provider Capacity Report for
      purposes of encounter data submission prior to submitting encounter data in
      connection with services by the provider. MCEs shall require each qualified provider,
      except HRSN Service Providers, to have and use an NPI as enumerated            by the
      National Plan and Provider Enumeration System (NPPES),;
(i)   The provider enrollment request (for encounter purposes) and credentialing
      documents require the disclosure of taxpayer identification numbers. The Authority
      shall use taxpayer identification numbers for the administration of this program
      including provider enrollment, internal verification, and administrative purposes for


                                                                                                      91
                the medical assistance program for administration of tax laws. The Authority may use
                taxpayer identification numbers to confirm whether the individual or entity is subject
                to exclusion from participation in the medical assistance program. Taxpayer
                identification number includes Employer Identification Number (EIN), Social Security
                Number (SSN), and Individual Tax Identification Number (ITIN) used to identify the
                individual or entity on the enrollment request form or disclosure statement.
                Disclosure of all tax identification numbers for these purposes is mandatory. Failure
                to submit the requested taxpayer identification numbers may result in denial of
                enrollment as a provider and denial of a provider number for encounter purposes or
                denial of continued enrollment as a provider and deactivation of all provider
                numbers used by the provider for encounters.
2}(4)    __An MCE may not discriminate with respect to participation in the MCE against any
    health care provider who is acting within the scope of the provider’s license or certification
    under applicable state law on the basis of that license or certification. If an MCE declines to
    include individual or groups of providers in its network, it shall give the affected providers
    written notice of the reason for its decision. This rule may not be construed to:
          (a)   Require that an MCE contract with any health care provider willing to abide by the
                terms and conditions for participation established by the MCE; or
          (b)   Preclude the MCE from establishing varying reimbursement rates based on quality or
                performance measures. For purposes of this section, quality and performance
                measures include all factors that advance the goals of health system transformation
                including:
                       (A)   Factors designed to maintain quality of services and control costs and are
                             consistent with its responsibilities to members; or
                       (B)   Factors that add value to the service provided including but not limited to
                             expertise, experience, accessibility, or cultural competence.
          (c) The requirements in subsection (2)(b) of this rule do not apply to reimbursement rate
                variations between providers with the same license or certification or between
                specialists and non-specialty providers.
{3}(5)     An MCE shall establish an internal review process for a provider aggrieved by a decision
    under section (2) of this rule including an alternative dispute resolution or peer review
    process. An aggrieved provider may appeal the determination of the internal review to the
    Authority.
{4\(6)
    __ To resolve appeals made to the Authority under sections (2) and (3) of this rule, the
    Authority shall provide administrative review of the provider’s appeal using the
    administrative review process established in OAR 410-120-1580. The Authority shall invite
    the aggrieved provider and the MCE to participate in the administrative review. In making a
    determination of whether there has been discrimination, the Authority shall consider the
    MCE’s:
          (a)   Network adequacy;
          (b) Provider types and qualifications;


                                                                                                          92
        (c)    Provider disciplines; and
        (d)    Provider reimbursement rates.
{5}(7)
     _ A prevailing party in an appeal under sections (3) through (4) of this rule shall be
    awarded the costs of the appeal.
{6}(8)
   __ MCEs        shall not apply any requirement that any entity operated by the IHS, an Indian
    tribe, tribal organization or urban Indian organization be licensed or recognized under the
    State or local law where the entity is located to furnish health care services, if the entity
    meets all the applicable standards for such licensure or recognition. This requirement is
    pursuant to 25 USC 1621t and 1647a.
{7(9)_
   __ MCEs        shall not require the licensure of a health professional employed by such an entity
    under the State or local law where the entity is located, if the professional is licensed in
    another State.
{8}(10) _MCEs     shall offer contracts to all Medicaid eligible IHCPs and to provide timely access to
    specialty and primary care within their networks to MCE enrolled IHS beneficiaries seen and
    referred by IHCPs, regardless of the IHCPs status as contracted provider within the MCE
    network.




                                                                                                     93
94
OAR 410-141-3515: Network Adequacy


Network Adequacy


   (1)   Managed Care Entities (MCEs) shall maintain and monitor a network of participating providers
         that is sufficient in number, provider type, and geographic distribution to ensure adequate
         service capacity and availability to provide available and timely access to medically appropriate
         and culturally responsive covered services to both current members and those the MCE
         anticipate shall become enrolled as members.
   (2)   The MCE shall develop a provider network that enables members to access services within the
         standards defined in this rule.
   (3)   The MCE shall meet access-to-care standards that allow for appropriate choice for members.
         Services and supports shall be as close as possible to where members reside and, to the extent
         necessary, offered in nontraditional settings that are accessible to families, diverse
         communities, and underserved populations.
   (4)   MCEs shall meet quantitative network access standards defined in rule and contract.
   (5)   MCEs shall ensure access to integrated and coordinated care as outlined in OAR 410-141-3860,
         which includes access to a primary care provider or primary care team that is responsible for
         coordination of care and transitions.
   (6)   In developing its provider network, the MCEs shall anticipate access needs so that the members
         receive the right care at the right time and place, using a patient-centered, trauma informed
         approach. The provider network shall support members, especially those with behavioral health
         conditions, in the most appropriate and independent setting, including in their own home or
         independent supported living.
   (7)   In assessing the capacity and adequacy of its provider network, MCEs shall consider, in
         conjunction with the quantitative standards set forth in this rule, the variety of provider and
         facility types with the demonstrated ability and expertise to render specific medically or dentally
         appropriate covered services within the scope of applicable licensing and credentialling. This
         includes, but is not limited to, the prescribing of Medication-Assisted Treatment and more
         specialized oral health care services.
   (8)   All MCEs shall ensure 95% of members can access the following provider and facility types,
         further defined by the Authority in guidance made available on the CCO Contracts Forms
         webpage https://www.oregon.gov/oha/HSD/OHP/Pages/CCO-Contract-Forms.aspx, within
         acceptable travel time or distance standards set forth this rule:
             (a)   Tier one:
                          (A)   Primary care providers serving adults and those serving pediatrics;
                          (B)   Primary care dentists serving adults and those serving pediatrics;
                          (C)   Mental health providers serving adults and those serving pediatrics;
                          (D) Substance use disorder providers serving adults and those serving pediatrics
                          (E)   Pharmacy;




                                                                                                             95
                     (F)    Additional provider types when it promotes the objectives of the Authority or
                            as required by legislation.
        (b)   Tier two:
                     (A) Obstetric and gynecological service providers;
                     (B) The following specialty providers, serving adults and those serving pediatrics;
                                   (i)      Cardiology;
                                   (ii) Neurology;
                                   (iii) Occupational Therapy;
                                   (iv) Medical Oncology;
                                   (v)      Radiation Oncology;
                                   (vi) Ophthalmology;
                                   (vii) Optometry;
                                   (viii)     § Physical   Therapy;
                                   (ix) Podiatry;
                                   (x)      Psychiatry;
                                   (xi) Speech Language Pathology.
                     (C)    Hospital;
                     (D)    Durable medical equipment;
                     (E)    Methadone Clinic;
                     (F)    Additional provider types when it promotes the objectives of the Authority or
                            as required by legislation.
        (c)   Tier three:
                     (A) The following specialty providers,           serving adults and those serving pediatrics;
                                   (i)      Allergy
                                               & Immunology;
                                   (ii) Dermatology;
                                   (iii) Endocrinology;
                                   (iv) Gastroenterology;
                                   (v)      Hematology;
                                   (vi) Nephrology;
                                   (vii) Otolaryngology;
                                   (viii)       Pulmonology;
                                   (ix) Rheumatology;
                                   (x)      Urology.
                     (B) Post-hospital skilled nursing facilities;
                     (C)    Additional provider types when it promotes the objectives of the Authority or
                            as required by legislation.
(9) All MCE acceptable travel time and distance monitoring must assess the geographic distribution
   of providers relative to members and calculate driving time and distance from the member’s
    physical address to the provider’s location through the use of geocoding software or other
    mapping applications. The Authority shall provide tools and additional guidance specific to time



                                                                                                                 96
    and distance monitoring on the CCO Contracts Forms webpage
    https://www.oregon.gov/oha/HSD/OHP/Pages/CCO-Contract-Forms.aspx.
        (a)   ACCO service area may contain multiple geographic designations. When calculating
              travel time and distance, geographic designations shall not overlap and the following
              definitions of geographic designations shall apply:
                    (A)   Large urban area: Conjoined urban areas with a total population of at least 1
                          million people or with a population density greater than 1,000 people per
                          square mile.
                    (B)   Urban area: An area with greater than 40,000 people within a 10 mile radius
                          of a city center.
                    (C)   Rural area: An area greater than 10 miles from the center of an urban area.
                    (D) County with extreme access considerations: County with a population density
                          of 10 or fewer people per square mile.
        (b)   When calculating travel time and distance, MCEs shall use the following standards:
                    (A)   Large Urban Area:
                                 (i)    Tier one: 10 minutes or 5 miles;
                                 (ii)   Tier two: 20 minutes or 10 miles;
                                 (iii) Tier three: 30 minutes or 15 miles.
                    (B)   Urban Area:
                                 (i)    Tier one: 25 minutes or 15 miles;
                                 (ii)   Tier two: 30 minutes or 20 miles;
                                 (iii) Tier three: 45 minutes or 30 miles.
                    (C)   Rural Area:
                                 (i)    Tier one: 30 minutes or 20 miles;
                                 (ii)   Tier two: 75 minutes or 60 miles;
                                 (iii) Tier three: 110 minutes or 90 miles.
                    (D) County with Extreme Access Considerations:
                                 (i)    Tier one: 40 minutes or 30 miles;
                                 (ii)   Tier two: 95 minutes or 85 miles;
                                 (iii) Tier three: 140 minutes or 125 miles.
(10) MCEs may request an exception to a standard set above. MCEs may request multiple
    exceptions.
        (a)   Exception requests must be submitted in a format provided by the Authority and made
              available on the CCO Contract Forms webpage
              https://www.oregon.gov/oha/HSD/OHP/Pages/CCO-Contract-Forms.aspx.
        (b)   The Authority shall review and approve or deny exception requests based on criteria
              made available on the CCO Contracts Forms webpage. Approved exceptions must be
              reviewed at least annually.
(11) MCEs shall have an access plan that establishes a protocol for monitoring and ensuring access,
    outlines how provider capacity is determined, and establishes procedures for monthly
    monitoring of capacity and access and for improving access and managing access in times of


                                                                                                        97
    reduced participating provider capacity. The access plan and associated monitoring protocol
    shall address the following:
        (a)   Expected utilization of services based on anticipated member enrollment and health
              care needs of the member population;
        (b)   The number and types of providers required to furnish the contracted services based on
              the expected utilization of services referenced above and the number and types of
              providers actively providing services within the MCE’s current provider network;
        (c)   How the MCE shall meet the accommodation and language needs of individuals with
              LEP as defined in OAR 410-141-3500 and people with disabilities in their service area in
              compliance with state and federal rules including but not limited to ORS 659A, Title VI of
              the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act, the Americans with
              Disabilities Act, and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973;
        (d)   The availability of telemedicine within the MCE’s contracted provider network.
(12) MCEs shall make the services it provides (including primary care, specialists, pharmacy, hospital,
    vision, ancillary, and behavioral health services or other services as necessary to achieve
    compliance with the requirements of 42 CFR 438, subpart K) as accessible to members for
    timeliness, amount, duration, and scope as those services are to other patients within the same
    service area. If the MCE is unable to provide those services locally by providers qualified and
    specialized to treat     a member’s condition, it must arrange for the member to access care from
    providers outside the service area.
(13) MCEs shall have policies and procedures and a monitoring system to ensure that members who
    are aged, blind, or disabled, or who have complex or high health care needs, multiple chronic
    conditions, or have behavioral health conditions, or who are children receiving Department or
    Oregon Youth Authority (OYA) services have access to primary care, oral care (when the MCE is
    responsible for oral care), behavioral health providers, and referral, and involve those members
    in accessing and managing appropriate preventive, health, remedial, and supportive care and
    services. MCEs shall monitor and have policies and procedures to ensure:
        (a) Access to providers of pharmacy, hospital, vision, ancillary, and behavioral health
              services;
        (b) Priority access for pregnant women and children ages birth through five (5) years to
              health services, developmental services, early intervention, targeted supportive
              services, oral and behavioral health treatment.
(14) MCEs shall have policies and procedures that ensure scheduling and rescheduling of member
    appointments are appropriate to the reasons for and urgency of the visit. The member shall be
    seen, treated, or referred within the following timeframes:
        (a)   Physical health:
                     (A)   Emergency care: Immediately or referred to an emergency department
                           depending on the member’s condition;
                     (B)   Urgent care: Within 72 hours or as indicated in initial screening and in
                           accordance with OAR 410-141-3840;




                                                                                                        98
            (C)   Well care: Within four (4) weeks, or as otherwise required by applicable care
                  coordination rules, including OAR 410-141-3860 through 410-141-3870.
(b) Oral and Dental care for children and non-pregnant individuals:
            (A) Dental Emergency services as defined in OAR 410-120-0000: Seen or treated
                  within 24 hours;
            (B) Urgent dental | care: Within two (2) weeks;
            (C) Routine oral care: Within eight (8) weeks, unless there is a documented
                  special clinical reason that makes a period of longer than eight (8) weeks
                  appropriate.
(c)   Oral and Dental care for pregnant individuals:
            (A)   Dental Emergency services. Seen or treated within 24 hours;
            (B)   Urgent dental care, within one (1) week;
            (C) Routine oral care: Within four (4) weeks, unless there is a documented special
                  clinical reason that would make access longer than four (4) weeks
                  appropriate.
(d)   Behavioral health:
            (A) Urgent behavioral health care for all populations: Within 24 hours;
            (B) Specialty behavioral health care for priority populations:
                        (i)    In accordance with the timeframes listed in this rule for assessment
                               and entry, terms are defined in OAR 309-019-0105, with access
                               prioritized per OAR 309-019-0135. If a timeframe cannot be met
                               due to lack of capacity, the member must be placed on a waitlist
                               and provided interim services within 72 hours of being put ona
                               waitlist. Interim services must be comparable to the original
                               services requested based on the level of care and may include
                               referrals, methadone maintenance, HIV/AIDS testing, outpatient
                               services for substance use disorder, risk reduction, residential
                               services for substance use disorder, withdrawal management, and
                               assessments or other services described in OAR 309-019-0135;
                        (ii)   Pregnant women, veterans and their families, women       with children,
                               unpaid caregivers, families, and children ages birth through five
                               years, individuals with HIV/AIDS or tuberculosis, individuals at the
                               risk of first episode psychosis and the I/DD population: Immediate
                               assessment and entry. If interim services are necessary due to
                               Capacity restrictions, treatment at appropriate level of care must
                               commence within 120 days from placement on a waitlist;
                        (iii) IV drug users including heroin: Immediate assessment and entry.
                               Admission for treatment in a residential level of care is required
                               within fourteen (14) days of request, or, if interim series are
                               necessary due to capacity restrictions, admission must commence
                               within 120 days from placement on a waitlist;


                                                                                                      99
                               (iv) Opioid use disorder: Assessment and entry within 72 hours;
                               (v)   Medication assisted treatment: As quickly as possible, not to exceed
                                     72 hours for assessment and entry;
                               (vi) Children with serious emotional disturbance as defined in OAR 410-
                                     141-3500: Any limits that the Authority may specify in the contract
                                     or in sub regulatory guidance.
                   (C)   Routine behavioral health care for non-priority populations: Assessment
                         within seven days of the request, with a second appointment occurring as
                         clinically appropriate.
(15) MCEs shall implement procedures for communicating with and providing care to members who
   have difficulty communicating due to a medical condition, who need accommodation due to a
   disability, or, as detailed in OAR Chapter 950, Division 050 for those who have Limited English
   Proficiency, prefer to communicate in a language other than English or who communicates in
   signed language.
       (a) The policies and procedures shall ensure the provision of Oregon certified or Oregon
             qualified interpreter services by phone or in person anywhere the member is
             attempting to access care or communicate with the MCE or its representatives;
       (b)   MCEs shall ensure the provision of certified or qualified interpreter services for all
             covered services to interpret for members with hearing impairment or in the primary
             language of non-English-speaking members;
       (c) All interpreters must be linguistically appropriate and capable of communicating in both
             English and the member’s primary language and be able to translate clinical information
             effectively. Interpreter services must enable the provider to understand the member’s
             complaint, make a diagnosis, respond to the member’s questions and concerns, and
             communicate instructions to the member;
       (d)   MCEs shall ensure the provision of services that are culturally appropriate as described
             in National CLAS Standards, demonstrating both awareness for and sensitivity to cultural
             differences and similarities and the effect on the member’s care. MCEs shall ensure the
             provision of Oregon certified or Oregon qualified interpreters.
       (e) MCEs shall comply with requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as
             amended via the ADA Amendments Act of 2008, in providing access to covered services
             for all members and shall arrange for services to be provided by non-participating
             providers when necessary;
       (f)   MCEs shall collect and actively monitor data on language accessibility to ensure
             compliance with these language access requirements;
       (g) MCEs shall report to the Authority such language access data and other language access
             related analyses in the form and manner set forth in this rule and as may otherwise be
             required in the MCE contract. The Authority shall provide supplemental instructions
             about the use of any required forms:
                   (A)   Using the interpreter services self-assessment reporting template provided by
                         the Authority, MCEs shall conduct an annual language access self-assessment


                                                                                                      100
                          and submit the completed language access self-assessment to the Authority
                          on or before the third Monday of each January;
                    (B)   MCEs shall collect and report language access and interpreter services to the
                          Authority quarterly using the report form provided by the Authority. The
                          quarterly due date for each Report is the first day of each calendar quarter,
                          reporting data for the twelve (12) months ending one quarter before the due
                          date.
                    (C)   MCEs shall complete and submit to the Authority any other language access
                          reporting that may be required in the MCE contract.
(16) MCEs shall collect and actively monitor data on provider-to-enrollee ratios, interpretation
    utilization by the MCE and the MCE’s provider network, travel time and distance to providers,
    percentage of contracted providers accepting new members, wait times to appointment
    (including specific data for behavioral health wait times), and hours of operation. MCEs shall
    also collect and actively monitor data on call center performance and accessibility for both
    member services and NEMT brokerage services call centers.
(17) MCEs must submit a Delivery System Network (DSN) report annually to the Authority that
    includes access data and other access-related analyses in the form and manner required by the
    Authority, including but not limited to capacity reports on:
        (a)   Behavioral health access;
        (b) Interpreter utilization by the MCE’s provider network;
        (c)   Behavioral health provider network.
(18) MCEs shall report the methodology for monitoring network adequacy to the Authority and the
    Authority-contracted External Quality Review Organization (EQRO).
(19) MCEs shall implement and require its providers to adhere to the following appointment and
    wait time requirements:
        (a) A member may request to reschedule an appointment if the wait time for a scheduled
              appointment exceeds 30 minutes. If the member requests to reschedule, they shall not
              be penalized for failing to keep the appointment;
        (b)   MCEs shall implement written procedures and a monitoring system for timely follow-up
              with members when a participating provider has notified the MCE that the member
              failed to keep scheduled appointments. The procedures shall address:
                    (A) Timely rescheduling of missed appointments, as deemed        medically
                          appropriate;
                    (B)   Documentation in the clinical record or non-clinical record of missed
                          appointments;
                    (C) Recall or notification efforts; and
                    (D)   Method of member follow-up.
        (c)   If failure to keep a scheduled appointment is a symptom of the member’s diagnosis or
              disability or is due to lack of transportation to the MCE’s participating provider office or
              clinic, or lack of interpreter services, MCEs shall provide outreach services and offer




                                                                                                          101
             Care Coordination as medically appropriate to make a plan with the member to resolve
             barriers;
       (d)   Recognition of whether NEMT services were the cause of the member’s missed
             appointment.
(20) MCEs shall assess the needs of their membership and make available supported employment
   and Assertive Community Treatment services when members are referred and eligible:
       (a)   MCEs shall report the number of individuals who receive supported employment and
             assertive community treatment services, at a frequency to be determined by the
             Authority. When no appropriate provider is available, the MCE shall consult with the
             Authority and develop an approved plan to make supported employment and Assertive
             Community Treatment (ACT) services available;
       (b)   If ten (10) or more members in a MCE region have been referred, are eligible, and are
             appropriate for assertive community treatment, and have been on a waitlist to receive
             ACT for more than thirty (30) days, MCEs shall take action to reduce the waitlist and
             serve those individuals by:
                    (A) Increasing team capacity to a size that is still consistent with fidelity
                          standards; or
                    (B)   Adding additional Assertive Community Treatment teams; or
                    (C) When no appropriate ACT provider is available, the MCE shall consult with the
                          Authority and develop an approved plan to increase capacity and add
                          additional teams.
(21) HRSN Service Provider Minimum         Network Requirements.
       (a)   An MCE must offer HRSN Services in all service areas in which the MCE operates.
       (b)   The MCE must ensure that HRSN Services are delivered to Members +#-a-+easenable
             amountoftime-within the timelines outlined in OAR 410-120-2000 and further specified
             in the HRSN Guidance Document.




                                                                                                     102
OAR 410-141-3820:       Covered    Services


Covered Services


    (1)   General standard. The OHP Benefit Package includes treatments and health services which pair
          together with a condition on the same line of the Health Evidence Review Commission (HERC)
          Prioritized List of Health Services adopted under OAR 410-141-3830, to the extent that such line
          appears in the funded portion of the Prioritized List of Health Services. Coverage of these
          services is included in the benefit package when provided as specified in any relevant
          Statements of Intent and Guideline Notes of the Prioritized List of Health Services. The Benefit
          Package also covers the additional services described in this rule.
              (a)   As used in OAR 410-141-3820 and OAR 410-141-3825, the word “health services” has
                    the meaning given in ORS 414.025(13);
              (b)   Services are covered with respect to an individual member only when the services are
                    medically or orally necessary and appropriate as defined in OAR 410-120-0000 and at
                    the time they are provided, except that services shall also meet the prudent layperson
                    standard defined in ORS 743A.012.
              (c)   HRSN Services are covered with respect to an individual member only when the
                    Member belongs to an HRSN Covered Population and meets other service-specific
                    eligibility criteria as needed, as defined in OAR 410-120-0000, and the HRSN Services are
                    Clinically Appropriate as defined in OAR 410-120-0000;
              (d) Benefit Package coverage of prescription drugs is discussed in OAR 410-141-3855;
              (e) The Benefit Package is subject to the exclusions and limitations described in OAR 410-
                    141-3825.
    (2)   MCE service offerings:
              (a)   MCEs shall offer their members, at a minimum:
                          (A) The physical, behavioral and/or oral health services covered under the
                                member's benefit package, as appropriate for the MCE's mandatory scope of
                                services; and
                          (B)   Any additional services required in OAR chapter 410, or in the MCE contract.
              (b)   CCOs shall coordinate physical health, behavioral health, oral health care benefits, and
                    HRSN benefits;
              (c)   With respect to members who are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, MCEs shall
                    provide:
                          (A)   OHP Benefit Package services except for Medicaid-funded long-term care,
                                services, and supports; and
                          (B) Secondary payment for services covered by Medicare but not otherwise
                                covered under the Oregon Health Plan as specified in OAR 410-141-3565 and
                                specific to benefit packages in OAR 410-120-1210.
    (3)   Diagnostic services. Diagnostic services that are medically or orally appropriate and medically or
          orally necessary to diagnose the member's presenting condition (signs and symptoms) or guide


                                                                                                           103
      management of a member's condition, regardless of whether the condition appears above or
      below the funded line on the Prioritized List of Health Services. Coverage of diagnostic services
      is subject to any applicable Diagnostic Guidelines on the Prioritized List of Health Services.
(4) Comfort care. Comfort care is a covered service for a member with a terminal illness.
(5)   Preventive services. Preventive Services are included in the OHP benefit package as described in
      the funded portion of the Prioritized List of Health Services, as specified in related guideline
      notes. These services include, but are not limited to, periodic medical and dental exams based
      on age, sex, and other risk factors; screening tests; immunizations; and counseling regarding
      behavioral risk factors.
(6)   Ancillary services. Ancillary services are covered subject to the service limitations of the Oregon
      Health Plan (OHP) program rules when:
          (a)   The services are medically or orally necessary and appropriate in order to provide a
                funded service; or
          (b)   The provision of ancillary services shall enable the member to retain or attain the
                capability for independence or self-care;
          (c)   Coverage of ancillary services is subject to any applicable Ancillary Guidelines on the
                Prioritized List of Health Services.
(7) SUD services. The provision of SUD services shall comply with OAR 410-141-3545.
(8) Services necessary for compliance with the requirements for parity in mental health and
      substance use disorder benefits in 42 CFR part 438, subpart k.
(9) Services necessary for compliance with the requirements for Early and Periodic Screening,
      Diagnosis and Treatment as specified in the Oregon Health Plan 1115 Demonstration Project
      (waiver) and meeting requirements for individualized determination of medical necessity as
      specified in OAR 410-130-0245.
(10) Services necessary for compliance with the requirements for HRSN Services (as described in
      Oregon’s Medicaid 1115 Waiver for 2022-2027) and meeting requirements for individualized
      determination of Service authorization as specified in OAR 410-141-3835.
(11) Coverage of services for unfunded conditions based on effect on funded comorbid conditions:
          (a)   The OHP Benefit Package includes coverage in addition to that available under
                subsection (1). Specifically, it includes coverage of certain medically necessary and
                appropriate services for conditions which appear below the funding line in the
                Prioritized List of Health Services if it can be shown that:
                      (A) The member      has a funded condition for which documented clinical evidence
                           shows that the funded treatments are not working or are contraindicated; and
                      (B) The member concurrently has a medically related unfunded condition that is
                           causing or exacerbating the funded condition; and
                      (C) Treating the unfunded medically related condition would significantly improve
                           the outcome of treating the funded condition.
          (b) Services that are expressly excluded from coverage as described in OAR 410-141-3825
                are not subject to consideration for coverage under subsection (11);



                                                                                                          104
        (c)   Any co-morbid conditions or disability shall be represented by an ICD diagnosis code or,
              when the condition is a mental disorder, represented by a DSM diagnosis;
        (d)   In order for the services to be covered, there shall be a medical determination and
              finding by the Authority (for fee-for-service OHP clients) or by the MCE (for MCE
              members) that the terms of subsection (a) of this rule have been met based upon the
              applicable:
                    (A) Treating health care provider opinion;
                    (B)     Medical research; and
                    (C)     Current peer review.
(12) Ensuring that all coverage options are considered:
        (a) When a provider receives a denial for a non-covered service for any member, especially
              a member with a disability or with a co-morbid condition, the provider shall determine
              whether there may be a medically appropriate covered service to address the member's
              condition or clinical situation, before declining to provide the non-covered service. The
              provider's determination shall include consideration of whether a service for an
              unfunded condition may improve a funded comorbid condition under subsection (11);
        (b)   If a member seeks, or is recommended, a non-covered service, providers shall ensure
              that the member is informed of:
                    (A) Clinically appropriate treatment that may exist, whether covered or not;
                    (B)     Community resources that may be willing to provide the relevant non-covered
                            service;
                    (C) If appropriate, future health indicators that would warrant a repeat evaluation
                            visit.
        (c)   Before an MCE denies coverage for an unfunded service for any member, especially a
              member with a disability or with a co-morbid condition, the MCE shall determine
              whether the member has a funded condition or condition/treatment pair that would
              entitle the member to coverage under the program.
(13)Assistance to providers. The Authority shall maintain a telephone information line for the
    purpose of assisting practitioners in determining coverage under the OHP Benefit Package. The
    telephone information line shall be staffed by registered nurses who shall be available during
    regular business hours. If an emergency need arises outside of regular business hours, the
    Authority shall make a retrospective determination under this section, provided the Authority is
    notified of the emergency situation during the next business day. If the Authority denies a
    requested service, the Authority shall provide written notification and a notice of the right to an
    administrative hearing to both the OHP member and the treating physician within five (5)
    working days of making the decision.
(14) Ad hoc coverage determinations.
        (a) When a member requests a hearing pertaining to a funded condition and a funded or
              unfunded treatment that does not pair on the HERC Prioritized List of Health Services,
              and the treatment is not included in guideline note 172 or 173 of the prioritized list,




                                                                                                        105
              before the hearing the Division shall determine if the requested treatment is
              appropriate and necessary for the member.
        (b) For treatments determined to be appropriate and necessary under (a) in this section,
              the Division determines whether the HERC has considered the funded
              condition/treatment pair for inclusion on the Prioritized List within the last five (5)
              years. If the HERC has not considered the pair for inclusion within the last five (5) years,
              the Division shall make an ad hoc coverage determination in consultation with the
              HERC.
        (c)   For treatments determined to not be appropriate and necessary under (a) in this section
              the hearing process shall proceed.
(15) General anesthesia for oral procedures. General anesthesia for oral procedures that are
    medically and orally necessary and appropriate to be performed in a hospital or ambulatory
   surgical setting may be used only for those members as detailed in OAR 410-123-1490.




                                                                                                        106
OAR 410-141-3920: Transportation: NEMT General Requirements


(1)   A Coordinated Care Organization (CCO) shall provide all non-emergency medical transportation
(NEMT) services for its members. For purposes of OAR 410-141-3920 to 410-141-3965, references to a
“member” include any individual eligible for NEMT services under section (1) of this rule unless context
dictates otherwise:

          (a) The CCO is responsible for NEMT services for all of its members’ health care services
          consistent with the covered services described in OAR 410-141-3820 and the excluded services
          and limitations described in 410-141-3825 and (1)(b) and (1)(c) of this rule;

          (b) NEMT services for those health care services that, based on the member’s plan type, are paid
         by the Authority’s fee-for-service program and that, based on rule or contract, are carved-out
         from or otherwise not covered by the CCO and provided by the Authority. NEMT is not provided
         for HRSN services;

         (c) For members enrolled in the Compact of Free Association (COFA) Dental Program or the
         Veteran Dental Program, both of which are defined in OAR chapter 410, division 200, the CCO is
         responsible only for NEMT services related to the member’s dental services.


(2)    ACCO shall provide a toll-free call center for members to request rides.

         (a) The CCO shall ensure that its call center operates, at a minimum, Monday through Friday
         from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. The CCO may close its call center on New Year’s Day, Memorial Day,
         July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas. The Authority may approve, in writing,
          additional days of closure if the CCO requests the closure at least 30 days in advance.

                  (A) Consistent with OAR 410-141-3505,     a CCO may subcontract the operation of its call
                  center. If the CCO’s subcontractor is also contracted by the Authority as an NEMT
                  brokerage for FFS members, the CCO remains fully accountable for the performance of
                  the subcontracted work related to the CCO contract.

(3) Neither a CCO nor any of its Subcontracted transportation providers may bill a member for transport
to or from covered medical services, even if the CCO or its contracted transportation provider denied
reimbursement for the transportation services.


(4) Transportation providers shall be considered “participating providers” for the purposes of OAR 410-
141-3520 (Record Keeping and Use of Health Information Technology).

(5)  ACCO shall have written policies and procedures regarding its NEMT services. All policies and
procedures must be provided to all Members either in Contractor’s Member Handbook or in a stand-
alone document referred to as a “NEMT rider guide” that meets the delivery and content specifications
as defined by the Authority. The CCO’s written policies and procedures regarding NEMT services shall
provide, without limitation, for the following:

          (a) Allow members or their representatives to schedule:




                                                                                                         107
                (A) NEMT services up to 90 days in advance;

                (B) Multiple NEMT services at one time for recurring appointments up to 90 days in
                advance; and

                (C) Same-day NEMT services.

        (b) Comply with the following criteria for member drop-offs and pick-up protocols. Drivers are
        not permitted to:

                (A) Drop Members off at an appointment more than 15 minutes prior to the office or
                other facility opening for business unless requested by the member or, as applicable,
                the Member’s guardian, parent, or representative; and

                (B) Pick up Members from an appointment more than 15 minutes after the office or
                facility closes for business unless the appointment is not reasonably expected to end
                within 15 minutes after closing, or as requested by the member, or as applicable, the
                Member’s guardian, parent, or representative.

        (c) Describe passenger rights and responsibilities as set forth in 42 CFR §438.210, and as set
        forth in OARs 410-141-3920 through 410-141-3960, and other state and federal administrative
        statutes and rules relating to the rights and responsibilities of Medicaid recipients such as the
        right to file a grievance and request an appeal or reconsideration.

(6)   ACCO must review a NEMT ride service authorization request with the following modifications:

        (a) Approving and scheduling, or denying, a request for NEMT ride services (including all legs of
        the trip) within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving the request. This timeframe shall be reduced
        as necessary to ensure the member arrives in time for their appointment:

                (A) If approved, notify members by their preferred method of contact of the applicable
                arrangements prior to the date of the NEMT service;

                (B) If intending to deny the NEMT ride, the CCO must provide a secondary review by
                another employee with knowledge of NEMT service requirements and mail the NOABD
                within 72 hours of denial determination.


        (b) Adhering to the grievance and appeal processes and rights specified in OAR 410-141-3835
        through 410-141-3915 available with respect to NEMT services; and


        (c) The CCO shall mail, within 72 hours of denial, a notice of adverse benefit determination to:

                (A)   Amember denied a ride; and

                (B) CCOs shall provide a copy of the NOABD to the provider with which the affected
                member was scheduled for an appointment, when the provider is part of the CCO’s
                provider network and requested the transportation on the member’s behalf, in a format
                that is agreeable to the provider and provides sufficient documentation of notification.

                                                                                                            108
(7) This rule applies only to the Authority’s pilot project in effect for 2/16/2024 through 2/15/2025,
which allows a CCO to utilize a Transportation Network Company (TNC) to provide NEMT services to the
CCO’s members.

        (a) Transportation network company (TNC) has the meaning found in ORS 742.520.

        (b)   A TNC must obtain a certification from the Oregon Health Authority to participate in the TNC
        Pilot Program as an NEMT provider. Certification for the TNC pilot program is obtained by
        submitting to     HSD.QualityAssurance   @odhsoha.oregon.gov    the following documents:

                  (A) A document that identifies the process or policies the TNC follows and documents its
                 compliance with the requirement that each driver has a valid driver license. The TNC
                 must maintain records of their drivers participating in the TNC Pilot and share relevant
                 information with OHA when requested;

                  (B) A document that identifies the processes or policies the TNC follows and documents
                 its compliance with the processes and policies, to ensure that proposed TNC pilot
                 program drivers, employees, agents and contractors are not, as described in 42 CFR
                 §438.610 (a) or (b): Excluded, suspended, or debarred, or otherwise excluded from
                 participating in procurement or non-procurement activities under the Federal
                 Acquisition Regulations or federal Executive Order No. 12549 or the implementation
                 guidelines for federal Executive Order No. 12549; or Excluded from participation in any
                 federal health care program under section 1128 or 1128A of the Social Security Act as
                 described in 42 CFR 438.610;


                  (C)   A document that identifies the process or policies that the TNC follows and
                 documents its compliance with the processes and policies, to ensure that all TNC
                  proposed pilot program drivers have not: Committed more than tree (3) traffic
                 violations under ORS 801.557 in the past three(3)     years; or Committed one (1) or more
                 traffic crimes under ORS 801.545 within the past seven (7) years; or Have been
                 convicted of Driving Under the Influence of Intoxicants under ORS 813.010 within the
                  last seven (7) years;

                  (D) The TNC’s policy for monitoring the driving records and criminal records of all of its
                  proposed TNC pilot program drivers, employees, agents, and contractors;


                 (E) The TNC’s policy for compliance with federal and state regulatory requirements to
                 ensure all OHP member information is protected in accordance with OAR 410-136-3280;


                  (F) Proof of insurance and policy compliant with ORS 742.520(1)(b).

        (c) Upon receipt of the documents identified in subsection (b) of this rule, the application shall
        be reviewed and if all requirements are met, then the Authority shall issue a certificate of
        approval to participate in the TNC Pilot Program.

                  (A) Once certification is issued, a TNC certified to participate in the TNC Pilot Program
                 shall be eligible to provide rides to OHP Members upon request from the Authority ora
                 CCO;

                                                                                                              109
(B) Rides authorized to be provided by a driver employed by or contracted with a
certified TNC Pilot Program may only be utilized by a CCO or the Authority if:

        (i) No NEMT driver who meets the requirements identified in OAR 410-136-3040
        (NEMT Driver) accepts an NEMT brokerage request within twenty-four (24)
        hours of the scheduled ride time; or

        (ii)   A previously scheduled NEMT Driver cancels the assigned ride within twenty-
        four (24) hours of the scheduled ride time and no other NEMT Driver accepts,
        within a reasonable period of time, the brokerage’s new request for another
        NEMT Driver; or

        (iii) The previously scheduled NEMT Driver does not arrive at the pick-up
        location within fifteen (15) minutes after the scheduled pick-up time.




                                                                                       110
