 Fact Sheet for Local Continuums of Care (CoC) on the
 Conversion of McKinney Moderate Rehabilitation Single
 Room Occupancy (Mod Rehab SRO) Properties Under the
 Rental Assistance Demonstration (RAD)

                                                                                                                               MENTOR

                                                                                          |
                                                                   U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
                                                                                                                      * ily a
                                                                                                                      Ss | j
                                                                                         Office of Recapitalization   %         | il        é
                                                                                                                          %,            e




Release Date: March 2018. Source: www.hudexchange.info/resources/documents/RAD-Fact-Sheet-for-PHAs-and-Owners.pdf




  Are you a local Continuum of Care (CoC) looking to preserve the Mod Rehab SRO properties
  serving the homeless in your community? Learn how the Rental Assistance Demonstration (RAD)
  can help you get started today! This fact sheet is designed to help you encourage owners of
  Mod Rehab SRO properties to participate in RAD to preserve housing resources to assist
  homeless households in your community and to further your understanding of the RAD
  conversion process and its requirements. This fact sheet is part of an outreach and resource
  initiative for RAD. For more information, please see the information in the text box at the end of
  this document.

  RAD Background
                      RAD is a U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) program that is
      UN              open to owners of Section 8 Mod Rehab (including the SRO program), Rent
                      Supplement, Section 236 Rental Assistance Payment (RAP), and public housing
                      properties. Owners of properties funded under these programs can convert the unit
  &                   subsidy funding to long-term Section 8 project-based rental assistance contracts.


  RAD Benefits, Impacts, and Your Role
  What are the benefits of a RAD conversion?
  The Mod Rehab SRO owner can replace the current Mod           Rehab SRO HAP contract (which is currently
  renewed year-by-year and at restricted levels) with a Section 8 Project-Based Voucher (PBV) or Project-
  Based Rental Assistance (PBRA) contract with a term of up to 20 years.




CoC Fact Sheet
                                                                                                                             IMENT Og


                                                                                                                        all|
                                                                                                                                             °
                                                                                                                                   i             ©
                                                                    U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development   __              | *        z
                                                                                                                                                  ®
                                                                                                                                                  =
                                                                                          Office of Recapitalization   %, |                       =
                                                                                                                                                 ky
                                                                                                                        Sp                 eS
                                                                                                                             San   peve™




  PBV or PBRA contracts offer the following benefits:
  e      Acontract term up to 20 years that is renewable, allowing the owner to make long-term plans and
         ensure that housing remains available for the long-term.
  e      Higher funding levels to better cover operating costs.
  e      §=6Ability to leverage financing to support capital repairs or redevelopment, if needed.
  e      Arequirement that the property must have an ongoing admissions preference for the homeless.

  How can | tell the difference between a Mod Rehab SRO and other similar assistance
  programs?
  Mod     Rehab SROs serve low-income, single, homeless individuals. Mod Rehab SROs typically are owned
  by private for-profit or nonprofit entities and typically were renovated during the 1990s or 2000s. Units
  assisted by Mod Rehab SRO contracts are either “single-room occupancy” units with shared bathrooms
  or are efficiency units. Each property has a Section      8 Mod Rehab SRO Housing Assistance Payments
  (HAP) Contract between the property owner and the local public housing authority (PHA). This HAP
  Contract will specify that it is under the Section    8 Mod Rehab SRO program. The Mod Rehab SRO HAP
  Contract was initially for a ten-year term. While some contracts are still under their original term, most
  contracts are now renewed on an annual basis. Mod Rehab SRO is not the same as the Supportive
  Housing Program (SHP) and is not the same as Shelter Plus Care (S+C), including the S+C SRO component
  projects, which have now all been renewed as rental assistance under the Continuum of Care (CoC)
  program. Some Mod Rehab SROs may have received Permanent Supportive Housing funds for rehab or
  supportive services.

  How can the CoC help with outreach to owners?
  Mod     Rehab SRO contracts are administered by Public Housing Agencies (PHAs). Even if the CoC is not
  aware of any Mod Rehab SRO properties within its geography, CoC leadership should consult with the
  local PHA to determine if there are any such properties and to identify the owners. HUD recommends
  that the CoC and/or PHA contact owners and provide them with a copy of this fact sheet to make sure
  they are aware of the potential benefits of RAD and the opportunity to convert to Section 8 project-
  based assistance.

  What is the role of the CoC in a RAD conversion of a Mod Rehab SRO property?
  When an owner of a property wishes to convert his or her Mod Rehab SRO contract under RAD, it is
  required to consult with the CoC upfront before developing a RAD Financing Plan. In this meeting, the
  owner must explain the conversion of rental assistance; provide the project’s plan for rehabilitation;
  describe the ongoing preference for homeless individuals or families; and discuss coordinated entry for
  new homeless participants. If the owner plans to reconfigure units, he or she must secure a letter of
  support from the CoC. Similarly, if the owner plans to serve a homeless population not covered under
  the definition in the HEARTH Act, he or she must secure a letter of support from the CoC.

  Are properties required to continue to serve the homeless following conversion?

  Yes,    a homeless preference is required to ensure that the property continues to serve this population.
  For RAD PBV SRO conversions, the required preference is established by the PHA through its




CoC Fact Sheet
                                                                                                                                          m
                                                                                                                                     IMENT Of
                                                                                                                           ,r             i
                                                                                                                                                  Ky °
                                                                                                                                                         %©
                                                                   U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development        __                     *
                                                                                                                                                          z
                                                                                                                                                          ®
                                                                                                                                                          K
                                                                                         Office of Recapitalization        %°         |       |           =
                                                                                                                                                         ky
                                                                                                                                Sp                 eS
                                                                                                                                     S4N peve™



  Administrative Plan. For RAD PBRA SRO conversions, the required preference is established by the
  owner (in accordance with HUD Handbook 4350.3) and is documented               in the Tenant Selection Plan. The
  homeless definition requirements of the CoC Interim Rule (24 CFR 578.3) apply. The homeless
  preference outranks any other preferences. PHAs and owners are prohibited from adopting
  discretionary policies that circumvent the homeless preference; for example, discretionary policies that
  would prevent homeless individuals / families from becoming eligible would be prohibited.

  What does RAD say about screening residents?
  Existing residents have a right to remain, or return if temporary relocation is needed, and may not be
  rescreened simply because of conversion under RAD (with the exception of a few conditions established
  by statute). With respect to new admission, for conversions to PBV where the PHA administers the
  contract as part of its overall administration of its voucher program, while PHAs typically are required to
  establish standard screening criteria across all new admissions to its voucher program, HUD allows PHAs
  to establish more lenient screening criteria for properties covered under these contracts. (Project
  owners under PBRA already have the discretion to apply distinct screening requirements for new
  admissions in any individual assisted project.)

  Are owners of Mod Rehab SRO properties that undergo RAD conversion required to
  participate in the Coordinated Entry process?
  Owners are highly encouraged to follow the CoC Coordinated Entry process.              While participation is not
  required, the benefit of Coordinated Entry is that all providers have the same information on the
  homeless population in the community, as well as the resources available for homeless assistance.                   In
  HUD’s vision, the coordinated entry process is an approach to management of a crisis response system’s
  resources that allows users to make consistent decisions from available information to efficiently and
  effectively connect people to interventions that will rapidly end their homelessness.             For more
  information on the Coordinated Entry process, see:
  https://www.hudexchange.info/resources/documents/Coordinated-Entry-Core-Elements.pdf.

  Are owners of SRO properties that convert under RAD still subject to HMIS and HIC reporting?
  Yes.    Both the Homeless Management      Information System (HMIS) and the annual Housing Inventory
  Count (HIC) reporting requirements continue to apply.

  What resident protections does RAD offer?
  Residents enjoy the following rights and protections under RAD:
  ¢      Owners must consult with residents prior to conversion.
  e      Residents may not be rescreened because of conversion (except for requirements established by
         statute).
  e      If any residents need to be relocated temporarily due to repairs on the property, residents have a
         right to return to the property.
  e      Except for certain conversions to PBRA, residents have a right to a tenant-based voucher after a
         period of residency at the property (i.e., “choice-mobility”). (The household’s move does not affect
         the number of units on the Section 8 contract.)




CoC Fact Sheet
                                                                                                                             “tall
                                                                                                                                 4,



                                                                U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development




                                                                                                                     WV US
                                                                                                                        +
                                                                                        Office of Recapitalization




  What are the key eligibility requirements for Mod Rehab SRO owners?
  The owner must be in good standing with HUD and with the PHA. The owner must be in compliance with
  applicable fair housing and civil rights requirements. The project must meet HUD’s physical standards
  (Housing Quality Standards (HQS) or Uniform Physical Condition Standards (UPCS)), except with HUD
  approval.


  What are the key approval requirements for a RAD conversion of a Mod Rehab SRO property?
  The key requirements are:
  e   Required consultations with the CoC and with residents;
  e   Environmental review approval; and
  e   Financing Plan approval (essentially, the project and owner have sufficient funding to meet all repair
      and capital improvement needs identified in a Capital Needs Assessment (“CNA") that meets RAD
      requirements).

  What is the process for how a Mod Rehab owner would start                 a RAD conversion?
  A RAD conversion typically takes between 6 and 18 months from initiation to completion. The major
  conversion steps are depicted on the next page. Please note that some steps take more time to
  accomplish than others.


  Is it typical for RAD Mod Rehab conversions to include new financing and/or a sale of the
  property?
  New financing is common,     but it is required only when the project cannot otherwise pay for the
  immediate and long-term capital needs identified in the CNA.     Sale of the property may occur when the
  owner is recapitalizing the property with Low-Income Housing Tax Credits and/or when a preservation-
  minded purchaser acquires the property.


  Where can the RAD program requirements be found?
  The RAD program requirements, as they apply to Mod Rehab SRO projects, are in Section II of the RAD
  Notice (Notice PIH-2012-32 REV-3).    Requirements that are specific to Mod Rehab SRO properties can be
  found in Section 2.7 of the RAD Notice. The RAD Notice and many other useful documents can be found
  on the RAD Resource Desk (www.radresource.net). The RAD Resource Desk is open to the public; owner
  registration requires only an email address and password. In addition, the HUD Exchange webpage
  (www.hudexchange.info/programs/rad)        provides additional information, including a key facts document
  about RAD 2 for Mod Rehab properties,      a comparison chart of key differences between PBVs and PBRA,
  and other great resources.

  Is RAD technical assistance available for Mod Rehab SRO owners?
  Yes. HUD has made available a limited amount of funding for RAD technical assistance. Email HUD at
  RAD2@hud.gov for more information.




CoC Fact Sheet
                                                                                                                 ¢
                                                             U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development   :    fl dl |
                                                                                   Office of Recapitalization   %




RAD     CONVERSION               PROCESS                 FOR MOD               REHAB               PROPERTIES

                                     Submission of Interest
                 Owner provides basic property and owner information to HUD through
                         Resource Desk; HUD assigns a “Transaction Manager”


                             Prior to submission of Financing Plan, owners are
                             required to:
                                 e   Notify residents of their intent to
                                     participate in RAD and provide
                                     opportunities for comments on proposed
                                     plans                                                                      6-12
                                 e   Consult with local Continuum of Care                                       Month
                                     (CoC) (for conversion of Mod Rehab                                         Process
                                     SROs)
                                 e   Initiate the process with HUD to identify
                                     a PHA to administer the PBV contract (for
                                     conversion to PBV)


                                             Financing Plan
                       Owner submits all related due diligence (CNA, environmental
                      review documents, financing commitments, etc.) and proposes
                                 sources & uses and operating pro forma


                                                   60
                                                  Days



                                             HUD Approval
                              HUD issues letter to approve Financing Plan



                                                   90
                                                  Days



                                              Conversion
                    PHA and owner terminate Mod Rehab contract; new PBV or PBRA
                       HAP contract is executed; any construction financing closes




CoC Fact Sheet
                                                                   U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development     g ‘.
                                                                                           Office of Recapitalization   %    |




                             FOR MORE INFORMATION, VISIT:

    For conversion requirements, see RAD Notice (PIH-2012-32 (HA) H-2017-03, REV-3):
      ortal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=RAD Notice Rev3_Final.docx

    For tools and additional information on RAD:
            www.hud.gov/rad
            www.hudexchange.info/programs/rad/


    To submit a letter of interest, visit the RAD Resource Desk:


    For additional information on Multifamily Preservation:
    www.hudexchange.info/programs/multifamily-housing-preservation/


         Questions? Contact the Office of Recapitalizationat #3.




CoC Fact Sheet
