                                                                                                       DAN    JOHNSON

                                                                                                                   DIRECTOR

CLACKAMAS
  COUNTY                                               DEPARTMENT       OF   TRANSPORTATION    AND   DEVELOPMENT
                                                                                     DEVELOPMENT   SERVICES    BUILDING
                                                                150    BEAVERCREEK   ROAD   OREGON   City,    OR     97045



   June 12, 2025                                            BCC Agenda Date/Item:


   Board of County Commissioners
   Clackamas County

      Approval of a Personal Services Contract with Kittelson & Associates to develop an
       update to the Transportation System Plan for unincorporated Clackamas County.
      Contract Value is $1,732,401.14 for 18 months. Funding is through the County Road
                         Fund. No County General Funds are involved.
    Previous Board         The previous TSP Update was adopted by the BCC in 2014.
    Action/Review
    Performance              Build a Strong Infrastructure; Grow a Vibrant Economy
    Clackamas
    Counsel Review           Yes                        Procurement Review | Yes
    Contact Person           Jeff Owen                  Contact Phone                   971-429-0813

   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: The Clackamas County Transportation System Plan (TSP) guides
   transportation-related decisions, identifies the transportation needs and priorities in
   unincorporated Clackamas County, reflects all relevant national, state and regional
   transportation and planning requirements, and provides policies, guidelines and projects to meet
   transportation needs for residents, businesses and visitors in unincorporated Clackamas County
   for the next 20 years — through 2045.

   Clackamas County adopted its current TSP in January of 2014. Over the past 10 years,
   important changes have occurred in the requirements for TSP updates as identified in the
   Oregon Transportation Planning Rule (TPR), in the plans impacting transportation facilities in
   the county, and in the populations that live and work in the county. In addition, there have been
   two significant updates to the Metro Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) in 2018 and in 2023
   that increased the focus on safety, transportation equity and addressing the impact of climate
   change.

   The TSP Update will be created in coordination with the County’s cities, the State of Oregon,
   area transit providers, and other affected agencies and partners. The project will utilize




                                                                      For Filing Use Only




                   P. 503.742.4400        F. 503.742.4272         WWW.CLACKAMAS.US
comprehensive public engagement techniques including open houses, workshops, and surveys,
and technical and advisory committee meetings to inform the project's development in
addressing both urban and rural areas of the county. With the changes to the TPR focusing on
how systems planning is conducted within metropolitan areas, this project will acknowledge and
address the uniqueness of both urban and rural areas in the county.

PROCUREMENT PROCESS: This project was advertised in accordance with ORS and LCRB
Rules on November 21, 2024. Proposals were opened on January 8, 2025. The County
received two (2) responses, which were evaluated by a committee of DTD personnel, resulting
in aranking of Kittelson & Associates proposal as the highest. After Notice of Intent to Award
was issued, the statement of work and project fees were negotiated and finalized.

RECOMMENDATION: Staff respectfully recommends that the Borad of County Commissioners
sign this Personal Services Contract #1312 with Kittelson & Associates to develop the
Transportation System Plan (TSP) Update.

Respectfully submitted,


Ban    Jonnson

Dan Johnson
Director of Transportation & Development




                                           Page 2 of 2
                                        CLACKAMAS COUNTY
                                   PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACT
                                         Contract #0000001312

This Personal Services Contract (this “Contract’”) is entered into between Kittelson & Associates
(“Contractor”), and Clackamas County, a political subdivision of the State of Oregon (“County”), on
behalf of its Department of Transportation and Development.

ARTICLE I.
1. Effective Date and Duration. This Contract shall become effective upon signature of both parties.
   Unless earlier terminated or extended, this Contract shall expire on December 31, 2026.

2.    Scope of Work. Contractor shall provide the following personal services: Clackamas County
      Transportation System Plan (TSP) Update (“Work”), as described in the negotiated scope in RFP
      2024-104, attached hereto as Exhibit A.


3.    Consideration. The County agrees to pay Contractor, from available and authorized funds, a sum not
      to exceed One Million Six Hundred Twenty-One Thousand One Hundred Fifty-Eight Dollars
      and Twenty-Seven Cents ($1,621,158.27) for accomplishing the non-contingency tasks of this
      Contract.

      A contingency amount of One Hundred Eleven Thousand Two Hundred Forty-Two Dollars and
      Eighty-Seven Cents ($111,242.87) is available for contingency tasks requested by County. This
      amount is for as requested services and the exact amount of Work that County may require, if any, 1s
      unknown. Nothing herein shall be construed as a promise to pay Contractor any amount of the
      contingency.

      The total value of this Contract shall not exceed $1,732,401.14 for accomplishing the Work
      required by this Contract. Consideration rates are on a time and materials basis in accordance with the
      rates and costs specified in Exhibit B. If any interim payments to Contractor are made, such payments
      shall be made only in accordance with the schedule and requirements in Exhibit A.

4.    Invoices and Payments. Unless otherwise specified, Contractor shall submit monthly invoices for
      Work performed. Invoices shall describe all Work performed with particularity, by whom it was
      performed, and shall 1temize and explain all expenses for which reimbursement is claimed. The
      invoices shall include the total amount billed to date by Contractor prior to the current invoice. If
      Contractor fails to present invoices in proper form within sixty (60) calendar days after the end of the
      month in which the services were rendered, Contractor waives any rights to present such invoice
      thereafter and to receive payment therefor. Payments shall be made in accordance with ORS 293.462
      to Contractor following the County’s review and approval of invoices submitted by Contractor.
      Contractor shall not submit invoices for, and the County will not be obligated to pay, any amount in
      excess of the maximum compensation amount set forth above. If this maximum compensation
      amount is increased by amendment of this Contract, the amendment must be fully effective before
      Contractor performs Work subject to the amendment.

      Invoices shall reference the above Contract Number and be submitted to: Laura Kitts and Jeff Owen

5.    Travel and Other Expense. Authorized: x] Yes          [] No
      If travel expense re1mbursement is authorized in this Contract, such expense shall only be reimbursed
      at the rates in the County Contractor Travel Reimbursement Policy, hereby incorporated by reference
      and found at: https://www.clackamas.us/finance/terms.html.Travel expense reimbursement is not in
      excess of the not to exceed consideration.

Rev   3-2025                                         Page   i
6.     Contract Documents. This Contract consists of the following documents, which are listed in
       descending order of precedence and are attached and incorporated by reference, this Contract, Exhibit
       A, and Exhibit B.

7.      Contractor and County Contacts.
     Contractor Administrator: Marc Butorac                  County Administrator: Laura Kitts
     Phone: 503-535-7419                                     Phone: 503-742-9067
     Email: mbutorac@kittelson.com                           Email: LKitts@clackamas.us


Payment information will be reported to the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) under the name and
taxpayer ID number submitted. (See .R.S. 1099 for additional instructions regarding taxpayer ID
numbers.) Information not matching IRS records will subject Contractor payments to backup
withholding.

ARTICLE IL.
1.     Access to Records. Contractor shall maintain books, records, documents, and other evidence, in
       accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures and practices, sufficient to reflect properly
       all costs of whatever nature claimed to have been incurred and anticipated to be incurred in the
       performance of this Contract. County and their duly authorized representatives shall have access to
       the books, documents, papers, and records of Contractor, which are directly pertinent to this Contract
       for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcripts. Contractor shall maintain
       such books and records for a minimum of six (6) years, or such longer period as may be required by
       applicable law, following final payment and termination of this Contract, or until the conclusion of
       any audit, controversy or litigation arising out of or related to this Contract, whichever date is later.

       Availability of Future Funds. Any continuation or extension of this Contract after the end of the
       fiscal period in which it is written is contingent on a new appropriation for each succeeding fiscal
       period sufficient to continue to make payments under this Contract, as determined by the County in
       its sole administrative discretion.

        Captions. The captions or headings in this Contract are for convenience only and in no way define,
        limit, or describe the scope or intent of any provisions of this Contract.

        Compliance with Applicable Law. Contractor shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local
        laws, regulations, executive orders, and ordinances, as such may be amended from time to time.

        Counterparts. This Contract may be executed in several counterparts (electronic or otherwise), each
        of which shall be an original, all of which shall constitute the same instrument.

       Governing Law. This Contract, and all rights, obligations, and disputes arising out of it, shall be
       governed and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Oregon and the ordinances of
       Clackamas County without regard to principles of conflicts of law. Any claim, action, or suit
       between County and Contractor that arises out of or relates to the performance of this Contract shall
       be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the Circuit Court for Clackamas County, for
       the State of Oregon. Provided, however, that if any such claim, action, or suit may be brought in a
       federal forum, it shall be brought and conducted solely and exclusively within the United States
       District Court for the District of Oregon. In no event shall this section be construed as a waiver by the
       County of any form of defense or immunity, whether sovereign immunity, governmental immunity,
       immunity based on the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution of the United States or otherwise,



Rev    3-2025                                         Page   2
       from any claim or from the jurisdiction of any court. Contractor, by execution of this Contract, hereby
       consents to the personal jurisdiction of the courts referenced in this section.

7.    Indemnity, Responsibility for Damages. Contractor shall be responsible for all damage to property,
      injury to persons, and loss, expense, inconvenience, and delay which may be caused by, or result
      from, any act, omission, or neglect of Contractor, its subcontractors, agents, or employees. The
      Contractor agrees to indemnify and defend the County, and its officers, elected officials, agents, and
      employees, from and against all claims, actions, losses, liabilities, including reasonable attorney and
      accounting fees, and all expenses incidental to the investigation and defense thereof, arising out of or
      based upon Contractor’s acts or omissions in performing under this Contract. Provided, however, that
      pursuant to ORS 30.140(4), Contractor’s duty to defend obligations arising from or related to
      Contractor’s professional negligence, or related to professional services provided by Contractor, are
      limited to reimbursement of County's reasonable defense costs (including reasonable attorney fees) in
      an amount not to exceed the proportionate fault of Contractor, as determined by adjudication,
      alternative dispute resolution, or otherwise resolved by settlement agreement.

      However, neither Contractor nor any attorney engaged by Contractor shall defend the claim in the
      name of County, purport to act as legal representative of County, or settle any claim on behalf of
      County, without the approval of the Clackamas County Counsel’s Office. County may assume its
      own defense and settlement at its election and expense.

8.    Independent Contractor Status. The service(s) to be rendered under this Contract are those of an
      independent contractor. Although the County reserves the right to determine (and modify) the
      delivery schedule for the Work to be performed and to evaluate the quality of the completed
      performance, County cannot and will not control the means or manner of Contractor’s performance.
      Contractor is responsible for determining the appropriate means and manner of performing the Work.
      Contractor is not to be considered an agent or employee of County for any purpose, including, but not
      limited to: (A) The Contractor will be solely responsible for payment of any Federal or State taxes
      required as a result of this Contract; and (B) This Contract is not intended to entitle the Contractor to
      any benefits generally granted to County employees, including, but not limited to, vacation, holiday
      and sick leave, other leaves with pay, tenure, medical and dental coverage, life and disability
      insurance, overtime, Social Security, Workers’ Compensation, unemployment compensation, or
      retirement benefits.

9.    Insurance. Contractor shall secure at its own expense and keep in effect during the term of the
      performance under this Contract the insurance required and minimum coverage indicated below. The
      insurance requirement outlined below do not in any way limit the amount of scope of liability of
      Contractor under this Contract. Contractor shall provide proof of said insurance and name the County
      as an additional insured on all required liability policies . with the exception of Professional Liability
      Proof of insurance and notice of any material change should be submitted to the following address:
      Clackamas County Procurement Division, 2051 Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045 or emailed to
      the County Contract Analyst.

               Required - Workers Compensation: Contractor shall comply with the statutory workers’
               compensation requirements in ORS 656.017, unless exempt under ORS 656.027 or 656.126.
               XX] Required — Commercial General Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not
               less than $1,000,000 per occurrence, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for Bodily
               Injury and Property Damage.
               XX] Required — Professional Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
               $1,000,000 per claim, with an annual aggregate limit of $2,000,000 for damages caused by
               error, omission or negligent acts.
               [X] Required — Automobile Liability: combined single limit, or the equivalent, of not less than
               $1,000,000 per accident for Bodily Injury and Property Damage.
Rev   3-2025                                             Page   3
              The policy(s} shall be primary insurance as respects to the County. Any insurance or self-
              insurance maintamed by the County shall be excess and shall not contribute to it. Any obligation
              that County agree to a waiver of subrogation is hereby stricken.

16. Limitation of Liabilities. This Contract is expressly subject to the debt limitation of Oregon
    counties set forth in Article XT, Section 10, of the Oregon Constitution, and is contingent upon funds
    bemg appropriated therefore. Any provisions herein which would conflict with law are deemed
    inoperative to that extent. Neither party shall be lable for any indirect, incidental, consequential or
    special damages under this Contract Except for hability arising under or related to Article IL, Section
    13 or Section 20, any damages of any sort arising solely from the termination of this Contact in
    accordance with its terms.

11. Notices. Except as otherwise provided in this Contract, any required notices between the parties shall
    be given in writing by personal delivery, email, or mailing the same, to the Contract Administrators
    identified in Article 1, Section 6. [f notice is sent to County, a copy shall aisa be sent to: Clackamas
    County Procurement, 2051 Kaen Road, Oregon City, OR 97045. Any commenication or notice so
    addressed and mailed shall be deemed to be given five (35) days after mailing, and immediately upon
    personal delivery, or within 2 hours after the email is sent during County’s normal business hours
    (Monday ~ Thursday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.) (as recorded on the device from which the sender sent
    the email), unless the sender receives an automated message or other indication that the email has not
    been delivered.

12.       Ownership of Work Product. All work product of Contractor that results from this Contract (the
      ©




          “Work Product’) is the exclusive property of County. County and Contractor intend that such Work
          Product be deemed “work made for hire” of which County shall be deemed the author. If for any
          reason the Work Product is not deemed “work made for hire,” Contractor hereby irrevocably assigns
          to County all of its right, title, and interest in and to any and all of the Work Product, whether arising
          from copyright, patent, tradernark or trade secret, or any other state or federal intellectual property
          law or doctrine. Contractor shall execute such further documents and instruments as County may
          reasonably request in order to fully vest such rights in County. Contractor forever waives any and all
          rights relating to the Work Product, including without limitation, any and all rights arising under 17
          USC § 10664 or any other rights of identification of authorship or rights of approval, restriction or
          limitation on use or subsequent moditications. Notwithstanding the above, County shall have no
          rights in any pre-existing Contractor intellectual property provided to County by Contractor in the
          performance of this Contract except to copy, use and re-use any such Contractor mtellectual property
          for County use only.

13.       Representations and Warranties. Contractor represents and warrants to County that (A) Contractor
      *




          has the power and authority to enter inte and perform this Contract, (3) this Contract, when executed
          and delivered, shall be a valid and binding obligation of Contractor enforceable in accordance with tts
          terms; (C) Contractor shall at all times durmg the term of this Contract, be qualified, professionally
          competent, and duly licensed to perform the Work; (D) Contractor is an independent contractor as
          defined in ORS 670.600; and(E} the Work under this Contract shall be performed in accordance with
          the standard of professional skill and care required for a project of similar size, location, scope, and
          complexity, during the tire in which the Work is being performed. The warranties set forth in this
          section are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other warranties provided. The Contractor shall be
          responsible for the technical accuracy of its services and documents resulting therefrom, and County
          shall not be responsible for discovering deficiencies therein. The Contractor shall correct such
          deficiencies without additional compensation except to the extent such action is directly attributable
          to deficiencies in information furnished by the County.



Rey 3-2025                                                Page 4
14, Survival. Alb rights and obligations shall cease upon termination or expiration of this Contract,
    except for the rights and obligations set forth in Article If, Sections 1, 6,7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 20,
    21, 25, 27, 28, 32, 33, and 34, and ail other rights and obligations which by their context are intended
    to survive. However, such expiration shall not extinguish or prejudice the County's right to enforce
    this Contract with respect to: (a) any breach of a Contractor warranty; or (b) any default or defect tn
    Contractor performance that has not been cured.

         Severability. HY any term or provision of this Contract is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction
         to be iHegal or in conflict with any law, the validity of the remaining terms and provisions shall not be
         affected, and the nghts and obligations of the parties shall be construed and enforced as if the
         Contract did not contain the particular term or provision held to be invalid.

16, Subcontracts and Assignments. Contractor shall not enter into any subcontracts for any of the Work
    required by this Contract, or assign or transfer any of its interest in this Contract by operation of law
    or otherwise, without obtaining prior written approval from the County, which shall be granted or
    denied in the County’s sole discretion. In addition to any provisions the County may require,
    Contractor shall include in any permitted subcontract under this Contract a requirement that the
         subcontractor be bound by this Article I, Sections 1, 7, 8, 13, 16 and 27 as if the subcontractor were
         the Contractor. County’s consent to any subcontract shall not reheve Contractor of any of tts duties
         or obligations under this Contract.

17       Successors in Interest. The provisions of this Contract shall be binding upon and shall inure to the
     ©




         benefit of the parties hereto, and their respective authorized successors and assipns.

is       Tax Comphance Certification. The Contractor shall comply with all federal, state and local laws,
     ©




         regulation, executive orders and ordinances applicable to this Contract. Contractor represents and
         warrants that it has comphed, and will continue to comply throughout the duration of this Contract
         and any extensions, with all tax laws of this state or any political subdivision of this state, including
         but not limited to ORS 305.620 and ORS chapters 316, 317, and 318. Any violation of this section
         shall constitute a material breach of this Contract and shail entitle County to terminate this Contract,
         to pursue and recover ary and all damages that arise from the breach and the termination of this
         Contract, and to pursue any or all of the remedies available under this Contract or applicable law.

         Termination. This Contract may be terminated for the following reasons: (A) by mutual agreement
     *




         of the parties or by the County G) for convenience upon thirty (SO) days written notice to Contractor,
         or Gt) at any time the County fails to receive funding, appropriations, or other expenditure authority
         as Salely determined by the County; or (8) of Contractor breaches any Contract provision or is
         declared insolvent, County may terminate after thirty (30) days written notice with an opportunity to
         cure.

         Upon receipt of written notice of termination from the County, Contractor shall immediately stop
         performance of the Work. Upon termination of this Contract, Contractor shall deliver to County all
         documents, Work Product, information, works-in-progress and other property that are or would be
         deliverables had the Contract Work been completed. Upon County’s request, Contractor shall
         surrender to anyone County designates, all documents, research, objects or other tangible things
         needed to complete the Work.

au       Remedies. I terminated by the County due to a breach by the Contractor, then the County shall have
         any remedy available to it in law or equity. If this Contract is terminated for any other reason,
         Contractor’s sole remedy is payment for the goods and services delivered and accepted by the
         County, less any setoff to which the County is entitled.



Rey 3-2025                                               Page 5
21, No Third Party Beneficiaries. County and Contractor are the only parties to this Contract and are
    the only parties entitled to enforce its terms. Nothing tn this Contract gives, is intended to give, or
    shall be construed to give or provide any benefit or right, whether directly, directly or otherwise, to
    third persons unless such third persons are individually identified by name herein and expressly
    described as intended beneficiaries of the terms of this Contract.

22,       Time is of the Essence. Contractor agrees that time is of the essence in the performance of this
      °




          Contract.

23.       Foreign Contractor. If the Contractor is not domiciled in or registered to do business in the State of
      °




          Oregon, Contractor shall promptly provide to the Oregon Department of Revenue and the Secretary
          of State, Corporate Division, all information required by those agencies relative to this Contract. The
          Contractor shall dernonstrate its legal capacity to perform these services in the State of Oregon prior
          io entering into this Contract.

24,       Force Majeure. Neither County nor Contractor shall be held responsible for delay or default caused
          by events outside the County or Contractor’s reasonable control including, but not limited to, fire,
          terrorism, riot, acts of God, or war. However, Contractor shall make all reasonable efforts to remove
          or eliminate such a cause of delay or default and shall upon the cessation of the cause, diligently
          pursue performance of tts obligations under this Contract.

25. Waiver. The failure of County to enforce any provision of this Contract shall not constitute a waver
    by County of that or any other provision.

26. Public Contracting Requirements. Pursuant to the public contracting requirements contained in
    Oregon Revised Statutes ORS”) Chapter 2795220 through 2795.235, Contractor shall:
            a. Make payments promptly, as due, to all persons supplying to Contractor labor or
               materials for the prosecution of the work provided for in the Contract.
            b. Pay all contributions or amounts due the Industrial Accident Fund from such Contractor
                or subcontractor incurred in the performance of the Contract.
            c. Not permit any lien or claim to be filed or prosecuted against County on account of any
                labor or material furnished.
            d. Pay the Department of Revenue all sums withheld from employees pursuant to ORS
                316.167,
            e. As applicable, the Contractor shall pay employees for work in accordance with ORS
               2798235, which is incorporated herein by this reference. The Contractor shall comply
               with the prohibitions set forth in ORS 652.220, compliance of which is a material
                element of this Contract, and failure to comply ts a breach entitling County to terminate
               this Contract for cause.
            f£ ifthe Work involves lawn and landscape maintenance, Contractor shali salvage, recycle,
                compost, or mulch yard waste matertal at an approved stic, if feasible and cost effective.

27, Mo Attorney Fees. In the event any arbitration, action or proceeding, including any bankrupicy
    proceeding, is instituted to enforce any term of this Contract, cach party shall be responsible for its
    own attorneys’ fees and expenses.

28. Reserved,

29, Reserved,

30. Key Persons. Contractor acknowledges and agrees that a significant reason the County is entering
    inte this Contract is because of the special qualifications of certain Key Persons set forth in the
    contract. Under this Contract, the County is engaging the expertise, experience, judgment, and

Rey 3-2025                                               Page 6
       personal attention of such Key Persons. Neither Contractor nor any of the Key Persons shall delegate
       performance of the management powers and responsibilities each such Key Person is required to
       provide under this Contract to any other employee or agent of the Contractor unless the County
       provides prior written consent to such delegation. Contractor shall not reassign or transfer a Key
       Person to other duties or positions such that the Key Person is no longer available to provide the
       County with such Key Person's services unless the County provides prior written consent to such
       reassignment or transfer.

31. Reserved.

32. Reserved.

33. Reserved.

34. Merger. THIS CONTRACT CONSTITUTES THE ENTIRE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
    PARTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE SUBJECT MATTER REFERENCED THEREIN. THERE
    ARE NO UNDERSTANDINGS, AGREEMENTS, OR REPRESENTATIONS, ORAL OR
    WRITTEN, NOT SPECIFIED HEREIN REGARDING THIS CONTRACT. NO AMENDMENT,
    CONSENT, OR WAIVER OF TERMS OF THIS CONTRACT SHALL BIND EITHER PARTY
    UNLESS IN WRITING AND SIGNED BY ALL PARTIES. ANY SUCH AMENDMENT,
    CONSENT, OR WAIVER SHALL BE EFFECTIVE ONLY IN THE SPECIFIC INSTANCE AND
    FOR THE SPECIFIC PURPOSE GIVEN. CONTRACTOR, BY THE SIGNATURE HERETO OF
    ITS AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE, IS AN INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR,
    ACKNOWLEDGES HAVING READ AND UNDERSTOOD THIS CONTRACT, AND
    CONTRACTOR AGREES TO BE BOUND BY ITS TERMS AND CONDITIONS.


By their signatures below, the parties to this Contract agree to the terms, conditions, and content
expressed herein.

 Kittelson & Associates                                                             Clackamas County
                                  Digitally signed by Marc Butorac
                                  DN: C=US
                                  E=mbutorac@kittelson.com,
   M   a   rc    B   U to   rac   O="Kittelson & Associates, Inc.",
                                  CN=Marc Butorac
                                  Date: 2025.05.19 12:20:13-07'00'




 Authorized Signature                                                 Date          Chair                  Date

 Marc Butorac / Vice Preside
                                                                                    Name:
 Name / Title (Printed)

                                                                                    Approved as to Form:
 _099459-81
 Oregon Business Registry #

                DBC/OR                                                                  [ “inst MM                5/19/2025
 Entity Type / State of Formation                                                   County Counsel                   Date




Rev 3-2025                                                                   Page   7
                       RABIBET A
             PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACT
                   SCOPE OF WORK




Rey 3-2025              Page &
C lackamas County TSP Update
 ~




S CTIO! (3                           8C OPE OF WORK
     ™
      ‘




The TSP update shall be developed to meet the r equirem ents of the TPR for both the urban and
rural areas, as well as imp lement the Metro 26 4bon 3 RTP and Re mma Ord I Tran sportation Functional
Plan (RT “PY,
The TSP update owt il result in two primary products
                                          meee
               wee




                                                  heat
                a
          &



                      Peed
                      gen
                             yee
                             ped
                             oon
                                     fn



                                               is
                                                    oP)
                                         ‘aa




The TSP update must inc lude, but i s not lime ited to
                                                 beled,
                                                 ro




                                                            Set


                                                                 beled,
                                                                 re
                                                          ‘ead
                                                          ora,
                                                                   a)
                                                                   44
                              were
                                   aye
                                     wed
                                         eed
                                         oes
                                               ee
                             ‘aa
               aeA,
          oe




Au SUpPOTtLA 2 documentation, including the techn iv al memoranda                  TM) , will be in cluded as an
append i x(T SP Technical Appendix) including, but not | mn ited to
                                                                                       ?
                                                                          FAESS
                                                                           Fada




                                                                          Page 9
                                                                         ca)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     public involvement activities and projected meeting dates of all related committees, including the




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       The major objective of this task is to oversee the TSP update pro cess, schedule s and budget s, and
                                                                    €.              .
                              ee                                         2                                                                                iy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PMT. During the project, the CPM will be responsible for maintaining and updating the project
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     plan/se hedule, and f OF submitting pro &o ress reports, invoices and all related supporting data f OF




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       to establish lines of communication between the C ounty 7 staff and the Project € onsulting team.
                                        ‘                                .                                                                           het




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     schedule for all tasks, including projected delivery dates for all products, anticipated dates for
                              oa                        &                ~~                  OS                                                      $06,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .
                              mS >                      &@               &                   &                                                            yy                        atat




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Vhroughout the project, the CPM, with the help of the PMT, will manage and coordinate the
                                                oem                                         lan}                                                          ft,               ;




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     At the outset of the project, the Consultant Team will prepare a detailed project plan with a
                              Sa                        on           Qs                     a3                                                       me                              en
                          ae                                             i              ~~                           2                                    onc                        a
                              io)                       coe              Cy                 ww                ica                                         ne
                                                                                                                                                          es esi                           vo,
                              SS                                         co                                   G                                           _          teh             ifs
                          ry
                          Net
                                                        Fz
                                                        o. (°°
                                                              G                                               G
                                                                                                                                                     teOe            ettA
                                                                                                                                                                           te,
                                                                                                                                                                      gy, ruins
                              a                                          >                   Go’              2                                           fio         te             Site wa
                                                 ©                       4                  Saar              hl                                          pet         fa,            ft,         “thee,
                          om                    we                       8S                  2.               fon                                         o>                         A
                              73                        DP          a                        *                                                            a
                                                        WS                                                                                                Ay
                              om ‘                      oF           a3  4,                  Bq               &&                                          ae
                                                                                                                                                          ag cast                    ee          mELeet
                                                                                                                                                                                                  os
                                                                                                              &                                           hd          hy             hte           het




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ~
                              —                                                         a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7
                          ae ~                  PUB                 aSs                     dent             o =                                          (te
                                                                                                                                                          ‘et         sat test
                                                                                                                                                                      tweet                       tevn
                             i                                      a                                          NA            wos                          ees         a   rn                     ees
                                                                                                                                                          fe          hE  wt                       fey
                                                        Oo
                                                        ewe
                                                                                             a]
                                                                                             =       ‘
                                                                                                              SS             GS
                                                                                                                             a                            OL          amfe           Ci
                                                                                                                                                                                     mes         neeOG o
                          “Z
                          mt o™ ab                                                                               5
                                                                                                                         csa3                             ar
                                                                                                                                                          wee te
                                                                                                                                                                 EeSea |
                              io; pesjomes                                                   CF)              =a                                     tb             tems             sip,        lege
                              ,ee        °
                                         GO                                                  Go               om             da                       rn.) ‘3 meer
                                                                                                                                                      teat                                       oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                  mee
                                     fons =
                                                              :                         .                     a)             &                        tefl teed
                                                                                                                                                           ae
                                                                                                                                                          os   Sih
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                 hei
                                    ee
                                                                                                                                                          ‘dd         ple
                          a                         8                                   om                    W              ita)                    nneee,                          Ay            #3
                                                i                   ee                                       |               oS                           a                           ro              ta
                              Qo                                    Soe                                       t>                                       yes
                                                                                                                                                       fees  ie  EA                              ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                 RR
                              Ss ~~                                 SG                                        a)             Ww                        nT                                        es
                                 eo                                 ousocs                                           ,       a3                       5s    EO
                          aad    Mm                                 Ww   w                                               . od                         rd    wee
                                                                                                                                                            Deri pee
                                                                                                                                                                 SS
                          >
                              8                 ia
                                                        Oo               MA     CG Ea        ©
                                                                                                                         °   =
                                                                                                                             ie
                                                                                                                                                     te
                                                                                                                                                     eed
                                                                                                                                                                p21   a              ty
                                                                                                                                                                                      ws
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fara
                                                                         A3                                   <a          cal                        pm, Gee                                       ad
                              oO Pr
                                  -                                                                                      “4                          rr                                            See
                              Re                                         Nw                                              bard                        reg ter ye                                    tt
                              Sx. &Do                                ~                       B                a“             oo                           tat
                                                                                                                                                          ite,        ge, ee
                                                                                                                                                                      feet Sok
                                                                         A                   ol               (2)                                         rates a          a                       at
                              cP a
                               om                       pen
                                                                  OR oe                     dnt ;            ed          Seen                             esa     many                             en
                                                                                                                                                                                                   oi,
                                                                     com                    Sa                =           on                              ie    On     sat                        Yeeed,
                              ww                        D>          —_                       :
                                                                                               d                             oth
                                                                                                                                    n                     Cpe
                                                                                                                                                          cae!       yack                          EY .
                              a                         ob”                                  =               See                                          a
                              a) S                                       G3=y                = .              os                                          re      etTht5, fya" edheea                                                                "




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Page 10
                                                                                             GG               Qa             Som                     rered                                                                                   ts
                                                                                                                             >                         fre              9            ‘             tg                                         Od
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ei
                              aes                                        m                   ob
                                                                                                                                                          were




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   “a
                              Sse                                    &                       st                              f&                              eo                 ‘    ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ied
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ex
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         per
                              =a
                              on                                         Ve
                                                                         =                               {                   @Q                           ag
                                                                                                                                                          Mt         eee a           yy ee                                                   ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ea
                              Sw >                                       Oo                  Ee
                                                                                             a                Se             ©                        nt an on
                                                                                                                                                      a)         ne |                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘ete
                          es                                         =                       me               (>                                          nr        a                                                                        eee
                          ==     i                                       a                   =                               ee                       fees ewe 4   ay                                                                        ye
                          ‘>                    ow!                                                           Sd         .=                               oO                                                                                ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d
                                                                     —                                                                                                               a4            re
                                            .                        on                                                                                   eek         Ea                             oo                                  apes
                               ee 3                                      &                   or 5                            &                            wee         Oe             ga f
                                                                                                                                                                                       me                                                ap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         fg




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         the lead consultant and all subcontractors.
r                         oo                                         a3                 cme,                                                              eety)                     natin
wo                        feel                      b                om                      Cy ‘             a3         '                                -         Mitte,           ta            teh                                       As
                          Pat                                            Bos                                                 eb                           fa          GR                                                                     4
S                                   ‘                   =m               &                            5                      on                      Witch           hgh             eet,                                                hed
£
bd                        Se                            Sx                                   Bo                          oS                               CG th Nota                               cet                                   -
                          2SPoon soo                                                                                         sg
                                                                                                                             N.                      da
                                                                                                                                                          fe          Sad
                                                                                                                                                                                     oheed GS, riFOES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         eeteu
=                                  {
                                                                         =e.                                  oe             0                       “matet tyee                                 hy Tere                                     z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ie
r
ioe
                              tn
                              oe
                              5p 2
                                                                         OS
                                                                         aox                 Od  SA
                                                                                             So chet
                                                                                                                         am
                                                                                                                         =oO                              nie rue,
                                                                                                                                                          Cif
                                                                                                                                                          (mn
                                                                                                                                                              ge os
                                                                                                                                                                                    nenNag ener meee
                                                                                                                                                                                                i,
                                                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ped
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ined




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1 as Project Plan and Schedule
ee                                 fb7                                                           Ce                      ey                               PetfanCig
                                                                                                                                                            nee,    gen
                                                                                                                                                                    eE                                     ee                                o‘eet
                                       ¢ oO                                                                                                          cotehy nethee pti                                                                   oe
                              cw
                              eG
                              ow
                                z o eS
                                    ROA                                                                                  =
                                                                                                                             «e                           pa
                                                                                                                                                      Sea ln    nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‘eaas“
      I                       ~                          —                                           on       Rem            ad                           aa)       “ena!            see         eens      tee                               Seas                                  A
                                                                                                 +                                                                          4        Pee          ,         fos,                             oo)          ,                          ‘
<<
==              ocp
                          Zum     OG
                          tp€ oo raBS~ BF
                                          SS
                                                                                                                         3.
                                                                                                                           wo 4                       4   ie (tet are Ea
                                                                                                                                                          te
                                                                                                                                                          mene
                                                                                                                                                                  ta EG gtd
                                                                                                                                                                  PR
                                                                                                                                                                       " g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         regne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         weed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             fhe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       hat 5;
                                                                                                                             am                           pn                         eet                   tees                           beet            Ay      or      Leeseead
 _          loth)          ow                                            ¥              =   i)                               >                          ‘et          lity ts                       fhe     en                             ae                      omer
—_         om             com ot                                                         te                                  a                       PoOman             sn Oy                              CD                             rn                      are




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .
pans            ia            Oe eS                                      i                                                                                       es                                   ae te                                  oe   a ma,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ABs,       wet                  gty
FN              Samy          Pah                                        ey             =
                                                                                        t>                    C >            Set
                                                                                                                             ae                           ey 6a,edd    or
                                                                                                                                                                                                   fA    ead                                 ae
‘es!            Ge                                                                       :                                    el                          ‘eet      nr. a                          i)                                        Can a eae                                   Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5    pe                      ee
r
‘ode            S,
                ~         an
                                                                         ON ,            A                    S&S
                                                                                                              Gy)        ee
                                                                                                                                                          Lm.
                                                                                                                                                          a            a
                                                                                                                                                                                Ma oo              CS eeoe                                   wees             °        ie                 mec
=          O                  £8                                         26ao8 &                                             8                            6,0 a2 tee hed                                                                     a te                          a
                                                                     po                                                  nd                               we          ft                  at       ‘hed      oi                              Pot          he,           ts  5             a
                                                                    .                                                                                                 ‘                                           ‘                                       a            So    6d
re                            a3                                                                                                                          ee         eth                                                            A        Ay                           gem Son
            ~                                                       eh                                                   os                           Bs              ©              te          nee                                                                   th
ee?         ty                eos                                                       Om!                   >           cA                           a                                          Ai       ee)                               en                                eo)
|
oy
      D
     ee
                          vans                          & «8 =
                                                        =    ot    fs ©
                                                                   eo     vo                                             inti                        eaten
                                                                                                                                                                                 Set
                                                                                                                                                                                      HeAe
                                                                                                                                                     cotee ebeeewyPoe nseFeaSoh nlyteed                                             xS   fn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         feth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #                Seagees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         peat
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         gen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pei  oewyee aewea
no!
  oe  =
                              es
                              ae
                                                    a
                                                    }         FS        :
                                                                          @Q
                                                                         o=
                                                                                                                             al
                                                                                                                             ioe)                                                                                                  =2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   —_=
                                                                be                           ‘ dab            Suny 4         —
~          &              OF                                             Oo                  9                SS         TS             4¢   4   &        4                                                           @   &   &@    SS       8            &                                     &
                                                        be




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ev 34-2025
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ‘
won         €             VW                            EES                     2       ea                   5>              a                                                                                                      =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
ia?                   .       eon                                                            §                =ed            =                                                                                                      wh




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     o
                                pant 9 pot                                                                                   pod
           sere                                                                             Se
      ao                  bP                        Ors                                      og               Am         O                                                                                                         <<




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     r
A




i.
project. Under the direction of the CCPM, the CPM will be responsible for leading the consultant
team in all aspects of updating the Clackamas County TSP, will work with the CCPM to oversee
the TSP update, and will participate in review of the update by county commnittees, the Planning
Commission, and the Board of Commusstoners.

Facilitating and Supporting Project Committees
Consultant team will be responsible for facilitating and supporting the activities of three
committees, mcluding preparation of agendas, materials, and meeting notes for each meeting,
and documentation of any decisions or recommendations, described below. These committees
will meet throughout the TSP update process to review information and provide input.
Project Management Team (PMT)
Consultant shall establish a schedule for the PMT to meet to discuss the Project. The PMT will
inchide, but is not limited to, the CPM, CCPM, and other County representatives, as appropriate.
Consultant shall arrange and conduct up to 24 PMT meetings throughout the Project to discuss
expectations for upcoming deliverables and meetings.
PMT meetings will be virtual and not to exceed | hour. Dates and times of scheduled virtual
meetings must be determined at the kick-off meeting and included in the refined Project
schedule. Consultant shall arrange a standard meeting link and provide dates, times, and access
information to the PMT members as needed. Consultant shall provide a written agenda to PMT
at least 5 business days prior to the meeting, and draft visuals or slide deck materials at least 2
business days prior to the meeting. Consultant shall submit meeting summary notes within 5
business days after cach meeting.
Consultant shall arrange and conduct a virtual Project kick-off meeting not to exceed 2 hours in
length within 2 weeks of recerving Notice to Proceed. Specific items to discuss at the Project
kick-off meeting include, but are not limited to:
               “a
               ta
        o


               rg
             yoreda

                      |
               A

                      Sparel
                      vo

                               watts


                                          Year!
                               fonre
                                   Ware
                                0
                                       ene
                                          ”a
       @




Technical Advisory Committee (TAC)
The TAC will consist of staff that represent local, regional and state government stakeholders
including Clackamas County, Clackamas County cities, transit systems, Metro, Oregon
Department of Transportation (ODOT) and Oregon Department of Land and Community
Development (DLCD), and appropriate consultant team members. The TAC will provide a
forum for coordmation on technical issues including transportation plan methodologies and
forecasting. The TAC will also provide input on local, regional and state agency concerns and
facilitate coordmation with other transportation planning efforts.
Public Advisory Committee (PAC)
The membership of the PAC will be informed by the equity analysis and equitable engagement
framework, and will likely consist of interested residents, property/business owners, and persons
with limited access to single occupancy vehicles and other county representatives, to advise the
staff and consultant team on community concerns and issues and to help develop alternatives.
Consultant, in consultation with PMT, shall prepare a PAC Roster, including contact
information, and draft language and materials for mvites from the CCPM to participate on the
PAC to review Project deliverables and provide guidance. Meetings and meeting materials will
Rey 3-2025                                        Page fl
     be open to the public, and will be publicized through the project website, social media, and other
     appropriate media.
     Geographic Subarea Area (GSA) Meetings
     The PAC will also have representation at the GSA meetings. Each of the five GSAs will have
     two GSA meetings to 1) review draft TSP vision, goals, objectives, and evaluation criteria and
     project audits; and 2) to review and cormmnent on proposed projects, policies, and programs
     prioritization within the GSA.
     Parmer Agency Meetings
     Up to 5 partner agency meetings will be held to facilitate Task 4 and ensure successful
     interagency coordination and to work through any CFEC compliance topics that arise during the
     TSP
     TSP Update
           Update.
          1 4            Dearmnreivan       and                Bretethhvvtisan
          Ab      ‘nae
                         PPE
                          “

                             x
                               ci eh Ladabh chihha
                              a+   ~     as!               =
                                                               EPES LE PEDLALES          ASPafPvachhees
                                                                                               3  later
                                                                                                     =    Yeo
                                                                                                             Re)

     The consultant team will be responsible for preparing and distributing materials for all
     committee meetings including agendas, shde presentations, interactive exercises, handout
     materials and minutes, as well as all GIS mapping used in the planning, review and approval
     process of the TSP update, all reports, and the draft and final versions of all TSP sections
     including appendices. All documents will be prepared and edited in formats easily accessible by
     the county project manager. After review and approval by the county project manager and team,
     all documents will be dated and converted to .pdf format prior to distribution to other agencies
     and the public. The consultant team will be responsible for preparing and updating as necessary a
     master distribution list for ali TSP materials. Materials for each committee meeting will be
     released and posted online 7 days in advance of the meeting. Throughout the TSP process all
     agendas, handouts, presentations, reports and other meeting materials will be provided to the
     county in both electronic (both editable and .pdf versions) and printed form.
     Pras rugsa           aa           Pe. deovas dePRS
      Peggy           fsLoess
                         eo sigs eens sitwoye        PRs?
                                                  yh Ferny
     LE              win RAR PEAS


          1.1 Project Oversight
              1.1.1 Progress Reports, Budget Reports, and Invoices (up to 24 months)
          12 Plan and Schedule (Draft/Final/Updates)
          13 Meetings
              13.1 PMT Meetings (Up to 24 virtual)
              13.1 TAC Meetings (Up to 6/Up to 2 in-person)
              132 PAC Meetings (Up to 3/Up to 2 in-person)
              133 GSA Meetings (Up to 10 virtuad
              134 Partner Agency Meetings (Up to 5 virtual)
          L.4 Preparation and Distribution of Materials


z   EASK 2: PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT                                                       PROGRAM
          et             Ty.      ean   Tastaecrea
                                               een er    nes eet       Dee oe ere
                                                                               aee
           ;;            Rey
                         BOREyea iar
                                RS EF   be
                                        Si Petes   errs      aw
                                                      sayy peer  Ph   Leer
                                                                      Le Pee serra Re
                                                                                   rey
          2.4            XS AARSESA.    Labi Gyeag Ce sakkoaa gd      Woy sek criss
                                                +f    ae                    Xe!




     The essential outcome of the Public Engagement Program is to mform the public about the
     project, provide opportunities to be involved and give input, actively listen and document
     feedback and input, and show how the public engagement was a part of the process. While if is
     expected that the Public Engagement Program developed by the consulting team will mclude
     some of the typical public involvement activities, we are also open to creative ideas on how to
     engage with all members of the cormmunity.


     Rey 3-2025                                                                                    Page 12
Prior to the start of the TSP update project, the County will complete the required Equity
Analvsis and develop an Equitable Engagement Plan that includes recommendations on the
implementation of equitable engagement during the TSP update. The consultant shall mtegrate
these clements into the Public Engagement Program.
Working with county community relations staff, the consultant tear will develop and implement
a comprehensive Public Engagement program. The county expects proposals to include a clearly
defined strategy for community engagement using several public involvement options. Both
face-to-face and online engagement through a website, social media and other appropriate
methods should be used to engage the public and secure input on the transportation issues within
the unincorporated subareas, as well as on broader county-wide needs.
The Public Engagement Program should be designed to inform, secure input and build consensus
to ensure the selected transportation system improvements effectively meet the Clackamas
County transportation vision and goals, and the expectations of local, regional and state agencies,
tribal governments, businesses and community members. Due to the size of the unincorporated
area, the public engagement program wil divide the unmeorporated area into 3 geographic
subareas.
Using input from the Equitable Engagement Plan prepared by County staff, the TSP Public
Engagement Plan shall detail goals and strategies to involve the community throughout the
Project, ceritering the voices of underserved populations consistent with OAR 660-012-0130.
Since this will be a major TSP update that addresses both the urban and the rural areas, the
program shall include strategies to inform underserved populations about choices being made in
the plannimg process, provide meanmgtul opportunity to inform the process and provide an
equitable decision-making role in the process fo the extent possible, as well as engagement in the
rural areas of the county. Community engagement strategies may include interviews, working
groups, public open houses/workshops, online engagement, project articles, factsheets, and other
means to engage the public throughout the process, including translation services.
The consultant shall use the Metro 2023 RTP public engagement and Title VE non-discrimination
checklist to inform the Public Engagement Program and include the checklist document in the
Public Engagement summary at the end of the project.
   24             my:
                              Ne                Ve
                                                     ay
                                                              are 3s  r.*
                                           rel en,



                                                          poers




                                                               F348 L Ne
             pope




                                      oe
                        ord




   fata fa
                                     Poe




                                              evo
                                     5




A website will be a primary on-going method for information and engagement about the TSP
update. The Consultant shall provide content for a public-facing Project Website throughout the
Project. The County shall create and maintain the Project Website including, but not limited to
development, registration, hosting, gathering, and monitoring of content, and controls. Project
Website must be fully functioning and accessible after the Project Kick-Off Meeting and remain
fully functioning and accessible for a minimum of 6 months following Project completion.
Project Website must include, at a minimum:
              s               Praject deliverables:   Technical Memoranda and afl maps and grapisics Im POY os
                               tet




                              [PG formas, as well as GIS Mies used ta create the maps
              s                Eymbedded transiaion toa!
              s               Method to sign up for a project notification st
              s               Meeting information including times, locations, agendas, summaries, and materials
Project Website must be updated before and after meetings and at the end of each Task. Any
interactive features used for community engagement must not require user registration.

Rey 3-2025                                                                  Page 13
                                                    2)                                  ;
                                                                                                                                         gy ra,                                                                                                                      Z                                                                                                                                       g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ss on
                                                  eons                              =o                                              rare ‘nat
                                                                                                                                      a SAD a5                                                                         benos
                                                                                        3       baa                                                                                                                                                                  QR                                                                                a}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           o} s  sanne
                            A
                      anea
                      S o© nd GSa3                  a
                                                                                        =
                                                                                                                                     a)                         vion                                                   BA                     oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           —“                            © yey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          as
                                                                                                SS
                                                    ~                                           :                                                                                                                 wpe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        s
                                                                                                                                     ins}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2Rand
                                                                                                                                                      eet
                      .                                                                 wk                                           Li, ved                     het                                                                                A
                             .
                                           a oe                                         So:     da
                                                                                                OS                                   ene                        cape
                                                                                                                                                                                             were                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8                                                                                                                          o                          rasA
                                                                                                                                     “aoe
                      a                                                                                                                    Oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        =                   >        ©
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       oe
              oR
                     S S                          ce                                    SD      6p                                   aa                                                       oe
                                                                                                                                                                                              %                        eh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        oS                 —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2~                    .
                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     > go
                                                                                                                                     Sa                                                                                ne
              =                                     iP)                                                                                   Peond
             =       =      a                                                                                                                                                                were                                         =         “SS             bo                                                                                                                       3
                      OD                   rot) “a                                      cae!                                                     ech             ied                          SeadZA                                                                             i                                             2B
             ee
                                                                                                3
                            c                                                                                   .> .                 te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ward
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ‘ehch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SDs A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Oo
                                                                                                                                    a
                                                ape
                                                                                                                                                      Ge                                                                                                                                                                            =                                          oO
                             ex
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         an
                                                                                        2D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             vw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ont
                                                    57)
                                                                                                =
                                                                                        =                                            eA                                                       a
                                                                                                                                                                                                ef                                                                                                                                                                             os        =
                                                                                        Sesani
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *                                                                                    Ss
              ©       BS
                      >s    Ay                                                                                                       sa                          7                    “a                              tees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       se                 ad                a‘=                                                            “S sion!
                                                                                                                                     et%
                                                                                                                                                       se
                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                 oe                                                                                                                                                                                                            end
                        o:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘ e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8
                                                                                                                                         &
                                                                                                                                                                                      nie                              eS                                                                                                  ¢                                                                                 pe)
              PD>O          fon
                                                                                        >)                                             t                                          e e,
                                                                                                                                                                                                   _                   .                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   iwoe                                                                    es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oe                    8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       =)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  «ow
                e" ° Rope &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               eS
             . oon
             S                                                                      S
                                                                                    =
                                                                                       O
                                                                                        w
                                                                                         .  3                                        eeeee‘ egpeecorela                           ae                                                      Oo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          coo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wi                      =       =                                                  me
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               bing frees                                                        ~           _"
                                                                                                                                                                                      va d
                                                                                                                                                                                      ee
                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SSape                                                                                                                                43
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     =        =
                                                                                                                                     % &, &Sie                                                                        fenon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ce
                                                                                    e=2e25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 es                                                      =a
                ~~ «©
              5 = loon2o© 8
                             =
                                                                                                                                     2 ae,     ‘tilee                                 in fy
                                                                                                                                                                                      ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  offa)                   3          oO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &           Eg                                        We ”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SS           wn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           xe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Db s =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               gee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                        ome)
                                                                                                                                     ent  a
                                                                                                                                                                                      hawere TES                   ba                  er,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TOS
                                                                                     “e2.g                                                                                                                                             = AG      oO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               =
             =
                                                                                                                                      hee
               m
                   wt       pon
                           on
                                                                                                                                     28
                                                                                                                                            SO het                                                                nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            YS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       wD                                                  —"
                      ~ R                                                                                                                                                                                                              SAfe                                                                eo                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ie
             Gand
              wPeF
                      OC
                                           Qa, Q
                                                                                    &
                                                                                    Ninn
                                                                                                                                      "ee, Rs By                                      oe,
                                                                                                                                                                                          a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SQos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    asOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ee,                                                                                                                                                         Geio ‘
                                                                                                                -)
                            ow                                                          oS ey                                        gee
                                                                                                                                                                                   ay he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oma) B   os =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¥29u
                                                                                                                                                                                  ware
                                                   Pa                                                                                fet                                                                bY 1
                                                                                             >                                      wean nyforn                                                                                         ae a? 4 ae)a                                                                                                                           o
                                                                                                                                             fed                                                                      bet
              “28 ef "                                                                  =      oY               OO
                                                                                                                                    afy
                                                                                                                                                                                  “lee
                                                                                                                                                                                    Geas,
                                                                                                                                                                                               ge
                                                                                                                                                                                             wink
                                                                                                                                                                                              ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                       te ape
                                                                                                                                                                                                       eh
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ye ery
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            om
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e <OE                                                           =
                                                                                                                                                                           nn we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a>                                                                                                                                           =
                                                                                        ee                                                                                                    rn
              m  GO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *             Janay                                                                                                      ou
                             co.                                                                                                                                                             thet                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               o SGoo
                                                                                        ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                  it                                                                                                       a ,
                                                   pen                                                                                                                                               a                                 am & sO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          em                                                                    ©a
                                                                                                               f,
                    c=                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               >
                    phe
                            5S   3 1               6                                    =       Nw                                                    ee         en,
                                                                                                                                                                                      eg                                               wD                                        o                         ad n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a
              OCG aeSty r
                                                                                                                                                                                      baba     hie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          heato                ap om                                       a           83    =~ Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ‘= oo, ned                                                                                 2
                                                                                                C2                          ‘        ps               re
                                                                                                                                                                                                        OY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a3
                                                                                                              ~~                     a                eh"                             Gs                                                                                                                                                                                       wu            &os
         p    Qejote                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¥6d;
                                                                                        fh.                                                                                                  sree                                                                                                         eee
 wa
   cae?
                                                                                        See.                                                ny                  es
                                                                                                                                                                                      fia    eed       hay
                                                                                                                                                                                                       pee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ~          oO RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          oe                   tex ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ee Ee .                                         Ya
             SG fly EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                      ase                         ns                                                                                                                                                                                           A             .
panei                                      Sa      an)
                                                                                        SSad                                                                                          we                bt             ty               ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a,                   te                                              re nt ke’
                                                                                        Sao 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ad                                                                                  ry
  rs,         Ww
                                      {    ae                                                                                        &                &          fe                          G                    e                     3                            aD      Seed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               =.
                                                                                                                                                                                      ue SPn om
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :
“Sfees       Sun                                                                                                                                                                      (O                                                                                                                   CLA
                                                   cam
                                           Oo                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                                                    s                                                                                                                                                                     cond                 mm
                                                                                                       BS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E&
                                                                                                                                                      eed
                            ¢              2B
                                                                                        a
                                                                                        te
                                                                                                -                   %
                                                                                                                                                                 Seed
                                                                                                                                                                                      te            es                                    SO                                  ~                            chee!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               m                       =                       ‘wt
                                                                                            nea,                                                                                                                                          Se ‘ Se 2
  a0                                                                                        Byres  et  eh                                                                                       so) “                                                                                                                          is           ©                                  Pa            =
             OS  os         ©                                                              oi      a       nT                                                                         a       nee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          fe       ED                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         £)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CROE
ferns
nn”          «OS a)                               =a                                               gy                                                                              test                 ES             Seed                                                                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                          vonse                                                                                                                                                                                           a                                                                    xe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          >
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ay
         ,    eee                          2                                            v=
                                                                                                                                                                                      TEs
                                                                                                                                                                                    weg                     bradhed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TSS =                                                                              fs 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  =
  det
  a
             nd                           oS      _—
                                                   a                                aO
                                                                                     =         R&S ft en,                                                                                                                                Piaf        ene)                                                  . poned                                     5                   Oo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.
                      ae    a.
                            ene)                                                       @
                                                                                       S                                                                          a                                                                                  ran                         ©
                                                                                                                                     nC
                                                                                                                                     Pa                                                                :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ~                 ES
  gore                                    ant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,                                                                  ‘eat?
pele                                                                                                                                 Bis iTee eek                                                                                                                                23
                                                   an]
                                                                                                                                                                           Oey e te                                                               ~=2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               >
                                                                                                                                                                           M
rn.)= 3       cea                                                                               a              “a                                                          op                 ti,
                                                                                                                                                                                              oy
                                                                                                                                                                                              mm       toy,
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ey eed   ES                                                    8                                     geet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            beni               pet                     ee                      43            =
            =                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               G                     ~~
                                                                                                                                    tA on“
                                                                                                                                    totes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¢
{   ESL "Sh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    aE                                          =
                                                                                        hex
        et
                                                                                        eo
                                                                                                ~~                                                                      a yeas                                                         =     &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       os
                                                                                                                                                                            a)
                   os                                                                       &     &                                 ir                                                a
                                                                                                                                                                                      wh                                                ap s oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S                            &           aN                                                                                                          .               Q
               ss                                                                    wm e 2.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               =                                                       wo
                                                                                                         a                             wed
                                                                                    Napan         5
                                                                                                                     ets
                                                                                                                     a           ae
                                                                                                                                               tA‘3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -            Oo                          i >
                                                                                       DSS                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rn                               eS
ce0
  .
                                                                                                            Bg                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 waSo
                                                                                                                                        gata
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n                         7a)
    D  R                                                                                                                          ee a ne
                                                                                                         228% ng GBPh on,OG mia Baeee
                                                                                                         ae                                                                                                                                                                                               sess pa                                                              Sx
           ey                                                                                               to
                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       @
                  S                                                                                            gp                                                                                                                         ao
               O
                                                  “yr                                                                                                                                                                                               ry
    So
           ae                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       co!             rap)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (2        =                    ee a ew
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           =o
                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              =
                                                                                                                             a  b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               An
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          os
 i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mm 3
                                                                                      pere
                    Ss                                                                  s
                                                                                    S
                                                                                                a                                                                                                                                                                     =                                     oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ed
 ~                                                                                                  " e eo.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =                                                                                    Ais
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ae)
                                                                                                                                               &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 =
    £8 wo 5Ses                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ws
                                                                                                                                     ead
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mhJong                        p      e                                                                                                      QO                                          ww




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Page 14
                                                                                                                                                      oe                                                                                                                                                    Poy                                        &
                                                                                                            eear 6                                                                                                                                                   osae
                                                                                                                                                                 ee
                       a                                                                        ‘                                                                            -                                                                                                                                                 Ce                                              =
                                                                                                                     a) 0 tt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               =         ep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          meFamonet
                                                                                                                                                                                      g s
                    Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   k
                                                                                                                                                                                              —                                                                                                                                                        >                                                  >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NO                                                                            wm
                                                                                                                                  b                                                                                                       Se
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A
  ora                                                                               sot                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  «4D
                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ‘we
                                                                                    feCESv Ge                                                                                                                                                                                                                              O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a3                                =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ) osaSos&OTA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a
               es
              one                                                                                       igen,
  feos,                                                   :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CS
                            be                                                                                                   inne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pj                                           tas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 o.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             oe aSs
                                                                                                                                        eh
                                          AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            “a                 O@ef
                                                                                                               tty                           oes                                                                                                                                                                              ee
  -“    Oroe og 2                         wa        he                                     bail          ez    me    fo    s
                                                                                                                                  So    ftp,                                                                                              Of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      org
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S                                     =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EaL°
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      >
                                                                                    ‘A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ro)
                                                                                                                             tbs a
                                                                                                S                                           tO
 oped
 O    S                                                                              i                          a
                                                                                                               HORE py,
                                                                                                                                        ey non,
                                                                                                                                        te                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            teed                                                                                                         pla
                                                                                        Be   e                                       ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               os
                                                                                                                                  Fd
               =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 J
                  = os                                                                                         toy,  nn rn            rf
  ae                =                                                                    panei
                                                                                        fap)
                                                                                         & 8 oS                                      2                ee                  ag                                           ‘eof
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      et
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MESS bx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          she
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ES owt
  %S                                                                                                                                                              hte
      naan
      9 iorsS$ = Bw 4
                                                                                                                                     on e
                                                                                                                                     r
                                                                                                                                    ct tet eth a:    fa, rh                                                                              te                     i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          vale SSo m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e a oes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           fast
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             =           2
  Lo                                                                                                                                            oa BE    oe ahop, oho eens, eae,                                                         =a                          peal                                 deed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mm                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                        ia                                                                                                                                                           oe               oa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           > en&
                                                                                           .
  “a
  Gs    Pe     oa
                  = &                                                                    5   Som                                    ee
                                                                                                                                    &                                                                                                                                AS                                    we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ned                  Nosmy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        =          a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mt                                        OS
                                                                                                                                            had
 a
        hoo                                                                                                                            ty       see
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               he a ape                                                                                            er
              wh 2g ox=                                                                                                                     OY
  Sed                                                                                                                                                    heh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                      es=                                                                2                                                      mead                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     =x
                                                                                         “3                                                              oes eon Py. tedes                                                              oz
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             fees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          "
                                                                            ve)                 8S                                  thet
                                                                                                                                     «4ns
                                                                                                                                             td
                                                                                                                                          wateem Sy                                                                                                                  re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 an                         preci
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ay                 ate)                                            o                             TA          aH        Co
                                                                                           ERoo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S
                                                                            of
  oe                                                                                                                                        ee Ge             ty en                                                                                                                                       we                                     a)
  nat
                                                                                        S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       —
              am                                                                                          f                                                               ty                                                           Sry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a                                                                                                                                my
                      2                   enn                                                                                                         we                                                                                                                                                                        cy                                          -
                        © s
                                                                                                                                     2% a ns
renee                                                                                                                                WEE
                                                                                                                                                          weeae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                              m ns Bw B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OQ°-rm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 °F
                                                                                                                                          B
              poe     see                           *                                                                                              '                                  bes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       “™ O                                      az                       beled
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ru                                             —co. =                        3                          5 i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Tonhe
                                                                                                                                                              S M60
             om                                                                                                                                                                                     EE
  *
  Srarat     SS
                    = 6C
                      2                           od
                                                    a3                                  cS
                                                                                        so   ie)F                                   vee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  nine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B    le &                                4                ’                        a.   OG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    eae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                68                                             oe
  (om                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i
                            oo.
                      ke                                                                        by                                        fed                                                                                           oe                                       v        ¢                 Seog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            265 A ee
                                           oth                                                                  os                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘ema
                     Sy                                                                                                                   wenet                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                        a
                                                    x                                                                                rn         ape, RHE ‘bad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B                                                                                os GO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        bon}
                     vs»
                                                                                                o             haan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   )                                                                                           e
             SE= SS
                                                                                    5 =                                              an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
  onfh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       os
‘dean                                                                                                                                    deel                                     on          oe                           *                                                                                  ead                                                                                        om
                                                                                                      :                         y                                                                                                                                                                                              om                                            he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            m                                                                                >;
                                                                                                                                                                           4                                                                                                                                 rerey,
                                                                                        a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ;
                                                                                                                                                                                  Sebei                                if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Bs
                                                                                                                                     wsnae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 wo
                                                                                                Se
                                                                                                                                                                                             ped                                                                                                                               iso)
                  oc                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                    =“=
                                                                                                                                                                 bedt                                        mm
                                                                                                                                                      “hx                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        43=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2                   m5~~eE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a:
                                                                                                                                                                          a ptt                                        OAS
                                                                                                                                     2                                                        ooen                                        eo ;                                                                                                                                  oh
                                                                                        oe 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ny
  a3                                                                                                                                                                                                                   “At                Aa                                     A
                                                                                                                                                                                              ty,                                                                                                          ve
                                                                                                                                     aneh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ene
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ts                                                                                                                                                                                                               &Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ¢
                      fe    ee                                                                                              i        we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jan)                                 mS .         A
 4vbeae . £& GS                                                                                                                                                         a ith “Hn,
  ‘sy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 =                                   fos
                                                    a                                                                                                             Ge                                                                      a3        ¢aon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =                nm,                 bees     63            ont                      oy
        e f BS =                                    5                                   Se                                                                                                              ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ee ;                    “9                                 anne ‘                                                     et
 e —                                                                                    gf
                                                                                                =
                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                SS                   ap          Pp
                                                                                                                                                  “Mb            '
                                                                                                                                                                 eege             oad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       {3 SS&22.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     G a                                    ry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _         ae           ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Maw CD                    es .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8         >
  an                                              “eg                               Se r                                               fa
                                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                                          hy            s
                                                                                                                                                            5      ath
                                                                                                                                                                           Oe         tog    oh Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       “                                                                                       Bp                      en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SD                       w+ “2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sc?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   €3
                                                                                                                                      oeoaAy mo& ot, le            G d tsfene
                                                                                                                                                      :
                      ae                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a
                            ms                                                                                                                                  Onee                                                                                                                                      2agesfee             BH 2¢ 9cS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ro)
                                           Oo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                    Ue
  ~~          Bem                                                                               :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ex
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       =
                                                                                                                                                           teae he, Se* aphat
                                                                                                                                                         a
  weed
  yond
              C3‘                     - Of                                          ==          Foe                                                                                                                                                                  s
 teed
  5             . S
                            po
                                                                                    ~> OS
                                                                                    T                                                  re hb fy OS                         ge                                                          =            53 SF   ,                    fiom!   ae)                oy             a‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                = c                                     >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Se   eed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SOOTeae mys‘ o rayob.
              S
  on                         Se           dt
                                                                                                                                     Z£ZE  Seae      oN                                       ae        OEEee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ny
  re,         ss    «3        m
                            Sa)                                                           a2                                        cent 4  capsooBh te                                                                                                                                                                    fh               wos ‘                              SO“                           A
  a)                                                                                    ies
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ee                                                                                                                                                                     2.8                                      whet
                                                                                                                                        Oy
                                                                                                                                       ly                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      vm
  fin                       a3
                                           22
                                                    So. .                               o
                                                                                               =
                                                                                                i:              &                    ee
                                                                                                                                    yeya
                                                                                                                                          d
                                                                                                                                       mnae
                                                                                                                                               ne,    ig;
                                                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                                                                                              oes,Oe at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ‘cad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          So
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (os fo                                a                               n oo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2                       Y                   Bo. m                                               &
  eee
                                                              ¢                         a ©
                                                                                                          (     a>    weet gee                                              GB     i”ee
                                                                                                                                                                                       re                     pes
                                                                                                                                                                                                        beh etees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      'ay ~~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a) e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n                                                              ee                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C
  ct
                                                                                                                    Ste
                      Ee) Oo              SS                                                                                                                     Getaroen          we                   ge                               oS
‘wiLae,
fren,                 ky wont             ea)
                                                              penned                                                                                                              SEAS:Oe,                                              is                                     2 a3                                        a                                                   ee                            oe                :
                                                              on                                                                                                                                               .                         ee a                                                              aah
                      SS
                      nx
                                          ge SK
                                                                                        Q
                                                                                    ~~ S$
                                                                                               =
                                                                                               —
                                                                                                                                     ee ft
                                                                                                                                     Se
                                                                                                                                                        ra oe             @ ©nti                                                            Ss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         fm j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            am                              re                                 Qe                            =           &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   =
                                                               a                    2 xSSan&                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       or—t
                                                                                                                                               ak EY                              s                                                     wo                                                                    se                            ia                         >
  ne
                                                                                                                                     6”                      tes                                                                           ome 1                                                             ra            ce2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CS                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 uk a
 Lo                                                                                                                                                              V i                                                                                                          4                                                                                   a                                                      en
                                                                                                                                         & tet oyast£4
                                                                                                                                                                 ne,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rOOo
              A       oow                                                                                                                                                  a                                                                                                                                                                                                   cea                                       ay
                                                                                                                                                            i beh       Sipeg‘at aetea,                                                                                                                                                                           fens                       G2
                  O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e                                                                                                            en!
                                                                                                                                      4i                                                                                                                                                                     pod                                                                                         Gee
awe           aS                              Ww                                                                                                     need
                                                                                                                                                        ‘
                                                                                                                                                           ier;                                                                                                                                              w,                a>       Qu                                     eawear’                       oSo         ‘     ¢
                                                                             4                                                                                       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       wm         aS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         88B
wpe                                                                                                                                                         She omures. Seght                                                                                                                               i                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                    fax
 eet“              oe SS
              van te                       mS                   a                       at                    =
                                                                                                              2.                                                                 e                                                       oS    ;                                                                                                                               =             &
             wet                                                             ted                                                     sn
                                                                                                                                     angy,                                                                                              me  m OR mS                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  G        Ss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ;
 rae)              Sy   ee
                        owt                   QO                oo 4       npaak    — MmH
                                                                                                                                               e                           he,
                                                                                                                                                                           rr *                                                                                                                              ieneae        —.                                                                                                  weg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             @G e
               mS                                                            aa ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             g
                                          2                                                                                                                                                   ge                                       ad
 ol                     &                                                  cxeed    “m                                               cod                                                      ao  oot                                   aan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            go                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ont =e                                                                                                                                                                                      =z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rr)
  2                                                                                                                                                              Go                                                                                                                                                                                                d
               EAS
                  eee                         =                +                     os ome He                                      Net
                                                                                                                                    is                EG
                                                                                                                                                      a          Se        id ly             ween Ben
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 o                                       =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bo                                               oO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                be                                                           ae
                                            ZEPryS es
                                             Sra                           oteoa            q>                                                                              ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5              gon                &
                                                                                                zWF                                                                                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                        SS,
  ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ee                     on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         @
oe
  ae)*        a
              =
                 a
                      2
                            en ore                  s          poe           CS
                                                                            a.
                                                                                        weW&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Py
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         en          wit ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             =C01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             eee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  =                        tea,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4,                 ey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Be                       &         ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             “2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             oS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ne     ‘mma!
                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ev 3-2025
bodes                                                                      i)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tA7                                                  ona                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pe
                                           =        &                      peded        Oo      .
                                                                                               7oa                                                                                                                                 w     OS                                      N                                         ay                                 re           ayod
  eon                                                           3s          .           wwe
                                                                                        2        F
                                                                                                A fapa
                                                                                                                                            oy                                                                                           bad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            “en              6p              .             “ton             5D         =                                  © i                ott-,
              Ce                                                                                                                                                                                                                         {3                                                               +e
 7            2g             PM
                             SEExS bw
                                                   oa                  d                        oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          265os
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     G3;                         &3          rs           Lid                =              x          hg qm =                           =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ve                         =          a3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 82ions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .,
                                                                           “:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7S
                                                                                        ay
                                                                                        a)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    —                                              eb                ==
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a                        eGae =
                                                                                               fw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2D
                                                                                    =fannei 8g                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,O
                                                                                                                        .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
 o.          men      =
                      me                   ©        Lane
                                                    ms                 {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           loam!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       b nina
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Or 2           a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oy       r                                             c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           €<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GN >ft
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     F:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sao gor       &                                 en]
             Ph
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           fans                  .
                      TAS                                                           ©                         =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     oa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         . SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *    an  emmy                      1            g
                  Sn
                   fe




                                -y*
        2.1 Draft and f inal Publ ic E ngagement Memo
                                4



        22 Project Website
            22.1 Virtual Open Houses (VOH) (Up to 3}
                                                                 ( Up to 3 rounds}
                                                      ual
             220        MetroQuest Commun ity Engagement
        2.3 PeriodicOpportunities for Public Interaction
            23.1 GSA in-person Workshops Cup to 3)
            232 TSP Briefings (up to 10)          ?


            23.3 0 dl Engagement Meetings Cup to 20)
                            n
                        a



        24 Public Engagement M ater als
                        ~
            2A     ontact List
                        7
                                      S



            2A?     essapining Materials
            243 Input Materials
        25 Draft and Final Community Profile Memo
        26 Draft and Final Major Equity Analysis Memo
        2/ Draft and Final Title Vi Report
        28 Draft and Final Publ ie © ngagement Summary            as SOCIA ted v i th CF
                                            al                                             a]
                                                                                 7              4
                                                                                                    ‘C Enhanced Re VIEW
           Memo

                                                       4
3.   TASK 3 POLICY AND PLANNING w FRAMEWORK.
              o
              @



      Consultant shall as Sess             plans, policies, standards, rules, regulat iO ns, and other applicable
                                            ing
                                      @Xistin
      documents as they pertain to development of an updated TSP and develop for the updat ed TSP a
      VISION and goals, and evalu ation orit ert a for use later in setting polic ¥ se | ecting pret €e rred
      al termatives, project prioritization and d ecision ~riak WeItk . Consultant shall utilize template
                                                                         4




      materials as prov i i ded on the ODOT TSP Guidelines website and Metro Local TSP R CSOUPCES
      webpage as applicable.

                                                            Page 15
                                                   ae
                                                   Vf need,
                                                                             teed                             ben%          .                         K
                                                                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                                                                                                    .                                           @=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   z.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  eo3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               As
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               oa
                                                   apeh                       one                             seat          ee                        ae)                           a)                                                                                                                                                                                                        weed                      were
                                                    a,
                                                   wee    ined                we
                                                                              Oe                  en
                                                                                                  os,         6 Ls          wo
                                                                                                                            ae                    ied
                                                                                                                                                   €3                              Fuad
                                                                                                                                                                                   ie        >                                 =          arene nes)                                                                            U  4                                                          thee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :       oe,        vane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "dng  et
                                                    a      Sori               ond                detd        hat            ten                   oem                               Dm      Ss                                  en             Seng                                                                           nw)                                                             an       “ead         ae teas
                                                    ne,                       res                SE                        whee                   =              ¥                 os                                           ae                    eh                                                                           nd                                                          %       eb
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       pans
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              peg retOh ial UE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              “eg           weed
                                                   tas    a                   ba                  ‘ed        raps          weeds                      ©         =                  =<        i                                  =                     >       Dane                               be                               boa                                                         de
                                                           ee                 om,                vapey        at            et                        com        =        oe                 Re                                =          cee                 oC                                 a                        .        &                                                          eed      an           a          a   ene
                                                                                                                                                            ~£           2          ob       &                                  aA         Sf        2             2                            Soon or                                                                                                                 iE
                                                                                                                                                      =O
                                                                                                                                                      a                   8S        StNeo?                 °                   ey          aS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a          ee ae                                       N               we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  aS Psen)
                                                                                                                                                  SLEuiu
                                                                                                                                                  oo 2 8 Ss                                                                    oS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               as                     Ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      me                                        ses
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                             Og Ws                                                              S21  5 2                                                          x so
                                                                                                                                                      wo| a Se    Ss                                                            seS53                                                           S88
Framework shall inc lude spe Ci fic d rection Gn




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ;
                                                                                                                                                  3             Oe UT eg
                                                                                                                                                  BA
                                                                                                                                                  Aa                w= aeSson                                                  es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SOOS Ey 5 eeeseee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               oe                                                               Bre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a we8 oD%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =
                                                                                                                                                      ‘         foes      S         :       we
                                                                                                                                                      2                   3s       5         ee)                                oO         om                 2                                  ra               qa                    (8
                                                                                                                                                  Gey                     BM                Ss       ¢                          ma         “~         Oe                                          oS > oS
                                                                                                                                                  oo Ss                   Sa
                                                                                                                                                                          oR?                        8
                                                                                                                                                                                                    aye                         oO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                m0                    =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Or                                          3 oO 8a)
                                                                                                                                                  Sa                      So                 ek                                 os                    a            &                              oo     &
                                                                                                                                                  Sa                     ee                 =         8                         Sam                   AS                                        2 &
                                                                                                                                                  28829 78E
                                                                                                                                                  Seg,                                                                         2 aS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S535                                                               = 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                £2:
                                                                                                                                                      =              w=                     42S                                                      Yo                                           5S              @o
                                                                                                                                                      O88                eA                          So                         a          Oe                                                     oe                          Tm
          t




                                                                                                                                                  Se RL                                      SO                                Sek R                                                              .               ¥
                                                                                                                                                  PESO
                                                                                                                                                                                                :
                                                                                                                                                                                                     E
                                                                                                                                                                                                               {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SEs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               poor                       .        _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  o                                ©
                                                                                                                                                      og                                              >                                   rm OS                                                 Say                                &
                   ‘
         ‘




                                                                                                                                                                Pe        A        —                                           win                                 ‘ea                            ue
                                                                                                                                                      ==        = Ss     St4 om                oe)
                                                                                                                                                                                            ‘ran                                oa Sa,                                                            me=         4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FB
                                                                                                                                                      SAS:
                                                                                                                                                      a?
                                                                                                                                                                                    Ex S ‘                                      2 . ans
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Al                                                         As
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 fot                                                                                                                    “g




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page 16
                                                                                                                                                      Base   Seok                                                               fpe       fy                                                     we eS
                                                                                                                                                      a      BLM                                                                Oo 2 oT                                                           SR
                                                                                                                                                      aatreor                                                      .            €ae8       9                                                    &5                                4
                                                                                                                                                      = So & Os  S                                  ngewe
                                                                                                                                                                                                    =.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   pf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ieebed      pan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ronen a         a        cael
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9)                           -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                aa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a3
                                                                                                                                                      op)        sone    ne]
                                                                                                                                                                 =                  ee”                                         RU                   GS
                                                                                                                                                  Sse
                                                                                                                                                  ~—             ‘>       ap       oe
                                                                                                                                                                                     ea
                                                                                                                                                                                   a35      ion!               J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   fo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   pened,      =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S SOSGe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OSeb       Nad                panned              Wh    .       awon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                fanaa         . we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ay
                                                                                                                                                      Bom                           »        -      bo             \eemaal      =         none        A            os            aS                               =            Fut
                                                                                                                                                  SUS
                                                                                                                                                  em eo  PE
                                                                                                                                                       Soe
                                                                                                                                                        SO
                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   “—
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       “i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BY                GRY €
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ¢
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Re,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Fae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d                       oS
                                                                                                                                                      Pema
                                                                                                                                                      eS                  cs
                                                                                                                                                                                    ses
                                                                                                                                                                                    8        Se
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ae A         8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BAG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      “wm                          =&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Es         SSTE            pee
In addition, the Pol Wy and Plann ing




                                                                                                                                                      i                  Be        we       oe       fa              tora                 bs          ~~           a3             a                                           nal
                                                                                                                                                                 Set     aed                 eR     spon             bare)      Lae                   a)                                                      a
                                                                                                                                                  SE            ot                           fone                    orn        io)                  ve                           ke              Q           SS
                                                                                                                                         =
                                                                                                                                                  om =           Sa
                                                                                                                                                                   weomx fe ~ Oe oat                                           emGow                  ky8                        neo            mS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                imc: be
                                                                                                                                         Ss       ~.             SS    Pf     Oo =                                               Fr                   FTE                         S&S           EL    ev
                                                                                                                                         es
                                                                                                                                        oi g r wa                                            es                      ees        =                     aD      e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              —_                  4                           e‘ahord           =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              patie
                                                                                                                                        -e            ©           8423B                      24                      Ss         So          Se                                     -                          RS
                                                                                                                                         =e           ©          Sfp eo                                            fh          meter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  = Fes
                                                                                                                                         ‘S                      i                                                 reeed,                        i    n                  .                  q             ‘                   fi
                                                                                                                                         =<       C                     a)          3               aed              se a           ont               an                                         resi                              a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      oO      —_                  ene             ay              om               os
                                                    tet   p
                                                         het      bean
                                                                  OB,   a,                  BS    fen,
                                                                                                  ee         eha            Cs
                                                                                                                            ee aedcd    evo
                                                                                                                                        “ae                     =cS      '@
                                                                                                                                                                                        7    ion}
                                                                                                                                                                                             &      DO               ©eae*      Wwei”)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              c                                   B=    &
                                                   BG@m
                                                    irs,
                                                   en   eS rn
                                                                  Ls   Pd  br)
                                                                                    8G i    ab    a
                                                                                                  nS
                                                                                                              be     i
                                                                                                                            ee a)       S&S       SS
                                                                                                                                                      €hs pS
                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                                                                 ss                 qs
                                                                                                                                                                                             Bef&                  ©red         €B                    46x28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     con
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        enn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     eto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    =~
                                                                                                                                                                 Greom                       SY.                     &          SS         vase                                   OD                              ea
                                                    a
                                                      SS ma aBe gc
                                                   oy a
                                                   me    nS     *
                                                                  me a e
                                                                         ge                                                              me   .
                                                                                                                                                  OU , © w                                                           tend,      geen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               == :  ‘   ;                                                      Oo ; =
                                                   Ce tn       a OE       ea                                                                      Ow BS                                                                          ore   a                                                        eo & 2
                                                   CE
                                                    oe)     e2EBeR EBS
                                                           ‘eat   tees     Ey war   te ey   es           7    Sees   ree     a     ne    &        SESSEEN       yaaa      a                                    "     24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     hewdbel    PEO                                                             cs        d                   ,
                                                    po                        ee           Pek                                           hm           oO         Beaege                                              f         = 35e7 2                                                           5               es                                  mn           a         ae          eee OS               be GE Gn                    a,   Ue
                                                   (ime                      ae a mS ee mS 5 a en                                                                2         i     a                                             on        er                                                                                                           iehg    me            ee EEE eo              a          ee
                            2




                                                   eae om                a                      ae                                      of            =           a of oo au ae!                                     oe         mom = Oo                                                                      freon                an                 tele,   oe       Sent ong)   une eee  OES Sone   ent       phen ayer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              one!                   UG   UG   Gb
                                                                                                                                         2            Yeo        Nil           >                                   on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ££         263086                ea           6                        ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8.              TQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3we                    4-
                                                    &                         &             @     &                         %           Oe        SREEXE                                                           co           S&S         8         Buz we                                      Ss                                         2         %                           %      %             @
                                                                                                                                                  \              >                 ops               72)                        €                                                cpa              a                   ‘
                                                                                                                                        wd          Seen     Ee N                                                              Yaw   Bs                                                           = 2S S
                                                                                                                                        wo        =2Ee   gan & wo
                                                                                                                                                     S<aEeoR                                                                   Be    cer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               =Oocose                                                            =2os
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ok sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Se
                                                                                                                                                  oh                    aS                                                     hv i                  OO S                                                         ahs
                                                                                                                                       r cOn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ny
                                                                                                                  S                  Fso                                                                                     a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :                        &
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                  “eoSC       3      =
                                                                                                                             bares
                                                                                                                                         =
                                                                                                                                           N                                                                                                                  io)
                                                                                                                  —            2                                                                                                                               a. 5A>
                      i     ”                                                                                                                                                                                                            :
                      oy                                                                       5wf2 &
                                                                                                                 B —
                                                                                                                                         fo _ G ane
              g biel                                                                                                          =)
              Zoe
                                                                                                  ao 74             F —            3    a »  —   8 ,                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              = i
                                                                                                                                 €
         “Se
                      ‘ee                                                                                   oS
                                                                                                                 =55 2                         ES a e© e
                     Zfee                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                ©
                                                                                                                          8= 3
              eeons              WG                                                            ir           ”                                                                                                        >                                                   joe
                                                                                                                                                          =
                                                                                                          =
                                                                                                                                        CS
                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                                                    o                          e                                                             ‘
              a
              Sora e fe
                          fod                                                                          >                a
                                                                                                                              y
                                                                                                                              =
                                                                                                                                      s
                                                                                                                                          N o2 8 a                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                  a                   =
                                                                                                            =
                                                                                               : ) a a=iae n a
                                                                                                                                            ef 2
                                                                                                                               =
                                                                                               teb                                                                                                                                                             38 w5
              o      frat         “                                                                                                 ‘
                                 waa                                                                                                     e
              a f
                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                     e8
                                                                                                                               aea3                         e
                                                                                                                                             Sy
         a               5
         fn                                                                                           HR        e     2                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              72).
                          og
                                                                                                                        e 2              S  E a: s
                                                                                                                                                          cat
                                                                                               ga
                                                                                                            =
         2,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    og
                                                                                                                     =
                                 oo 4
                                                                                                                                          eS nE
                                                                                                                WwW
            2 2OE                                                                                                                                          & in
                                                                                                                                                                fos
                                                                                                         re 35 "3x ~o*—) ; z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pan
         AE
          ne                                                                                      S                         .       a 4      eae
                                                                                                                                               o
                                                                                                                                                s
                                                                                                                                                     m   SAnt  “
                                                                                                                                                              = {
                                                                                                                                                                                   =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ‘=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               o
                                                                                                                                                 :                                                                                                             a o
                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                          o          2
                                                                                                 aES eke
                                                                                                                      b
                                                                                                                                                                                               vind
         iseee peg
                                                                                                        iow
                                                                                                                                   a=!                     5 —
                                                                                                                                               a                                                             ee
         26 a?                                                                                                                           >        e           5
         Lfit ,on “&
                      oe
                                                                                                                                              n=o                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                ;a =

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2.
                                                                                                                                                    aP 2
                                                                                                             EE                                                                                                                                               =7 . s5                            “
                                                                                                                                                                                   Si
                                 oe                                                                                                                                                        4                                                 es
                                                                                                                                     SS S caatatas    an — i a
                                                                                                  a        n
                                                                                                                                                                                                        y]
                                                                                                                                                                                                             zes
                                                                                                                                             mt&            /                                                                                                                                 ee
                                                                                                                      CoEE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 iona
                  ee,
                                                                                                                                                              =
                                                                                                                                         53 —t - = obaOna
         week                                                                                                                                                                                                            l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 so
                                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                      :                                                                                                                                                        OS
              Ae Pee,
              wh
              a
                                we,
                                                                                                  = = a      i            a         Sg er25
                                                                                                                                                  2             eon
                                                                                                                                                                 l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               79)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a         aA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nae}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SZo,a
              ra e oe
                                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                                      c
                                                                                                      & "x we ‘
                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                                                        e                                                                                                                                    wees
         baon Pe Q e            fe                                                                <0                                                                                                                                                          ca
         eh | G fy                                                                                    =
                                                                                                                                          7                                                                                                                             —ey                  nr
                 he a                                                                                                  = f     oae          a                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                         8
                                                                                      -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a2 E
             ae
                                                                                                          —                                                                                                                                                   beo                            enhy
          ‘hgree Ophdeyl
          m
         wa        “       G
                  a ePeeept estes,i
                                                                                  P  r   =    aw ~    o
                                                                                             rs "3 owne n. am
                                                                                                        a   4         A gq 5 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         =.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rrea le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  te
                                                                                        oa SX“ari RmiPa oSS oo¢CoaSn ,p
            in
                                                                                                                           5 ar                                                                                                                               a .5
               te                                                                                                                    A
                                                                                  a ad 2 os td                        Se ee 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             vZed
         ‘e                                                                       i
                                                                                  c t                                                                                                  :                                                                                                     “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,neeS
              neond         sted
                                                                                      Pe ) = toYne 4wy)), qea; n ee
              eet
              te          a4y   eae                                                                    > a                                                                                                       ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ¢
         Bd haCady               Coat
                                                                                  cf
                                                                                                                                                                Ly
         “Seb ES ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ba                                 és
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             g
                                                                                                                 ce “— & eboe Tea&eLP                                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                                                                                               ‘
                                 ee
                                                                                                    = bet o
                                                                                               3 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ;
                                                                                                  8
                                                                                      q                                       cae
                                                                                  ome
                                                                                               a= E
                                                                                                            s        2                                                                                                                                        2 %                  8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              £525
           hesyTod,m fob                                                                                                          . e
           seni                                                                                                                              7                                                                                                                                                   ree
                                                                                                          x
                                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tated
                                                                                  c. 3                        a                  =    &              rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             aStn
         wsea
              eteste CS
                         fi
                                                                                                or)
                                                                                                    § cS S E
                                                                                                      —
                                                                                                                     B
                                                                                                                     an»E
                                                                                                                       san
                                                                                                                          e= e                             a                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                                          BE = ~                                                                                                                                                                 &
                                                                                          a                    >                                                     ad
          Z oa ePey                                                                            bm                 uy         ws
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i
                                                                                                            S
                                                                                                                                                                           cS
          a                                                                                    D
              2 E                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                          fe
                i   a   pas                                                           ooSr        us s Ro Wwc                  e                                 f=om               v                                                                         an)       SYe =o "OOD              on
                                                                                                                                                                 2b
                                                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                                                           iP)F s
                                                                                                                                   =
          mo            ),                                                                     .                                                                                                                                                               co              aoe
                  g   c
                                                                                  weal
                                                                                      a         a2.    3
                                                                                                              bex = 2v
                                                                                                                             w                                                             p
                                                                                                                                                                                        So end                                                                 So! po=re                     hee ;
                                                                                                                                                                                   =i
                                                                                                                                                Sone
          co                                                                                                                                                                                 = &                                                                                              wtd
          o ben id                                                                                                                 S]
                                                                                                                        2 ,                                                                                                                                                         Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   eC3 =S §2 s =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
                                                                                                  a “= aa heal 6UW)} aa mo :
                                                                                                                                                         es
         Be e“ter
                                                                                  a,                                                                                                                                                                                                         aed
                                                                                               wo e:                                             =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 23%                                   > 85
                                                                                                                                                                oo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page
         mig B           en                                                       con                         Q    s
                                                                                                                    S            “
                                                                                                                                            } V oO
                                                                                                                                                          x
                                                                                                                                                                  2    2                      a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              goy
                                                                                          os
                                                                                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                                            a                                                 s
              Sex                                                                                                                  a                                                                                                              apeng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dan
                                                                                                                                                          ot
                                                                                               r =N beesa fifoen oPPyonOwe= g So apeed onann 2we28
                                                                                                 ~      n s                           o r             8      8)   >
                                                                                                              e                                         )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  G aN h@e ms
                 ihe,                                                                                       )                             y
                                                                                  _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                             OP                                                               mN
                       ied
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              o=m                             os be
                                                                                                 aS i~o |
          at                                                                      iam                                                                                                              >
          a
              ge
               m s oe: oe                                                           ==                                             = N  _ 3 ew5          &x     lal a
                                                                                                                                                                  a )
                                                                                                                                                                                        =    oy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3a              3%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   pened
                                                                                                 oS 5 ey pamo o e o© ™faroeen‘ D                                                                                                                  paS3
                      B          pod                                                              i 1                       ™                                                         i  o      &                                                                                            oe or
deh5 wRee e ofasd
                                                                                                                                               =                                                                                                      ee
                                                                                                                                                                [a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ar5
                                                                                                                                                                    an
                                                                                                                                                                                             S= c~
                                                                                                                                                                                /
                                                                                                                                                                           3&S
                                                                                    i:                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  vo
     Be ak a                                                                      P=on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ee
 a         . te
                                                                                               “Ca     =                    aD                                  «@
                                                                                                                                                                  c                  =  a oQ     o
                                                                                                                                                                                             x “naes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              oo i
                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                     =
efe ewfeeat we
                                                                                                                                                 b           ,
                                                                                                  SS 3 qey 2                                                                                                                                          opeed
 “                                                                                                                                             c   ed
                                                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Gs cA
                                                                                                                                 Rile                               3
                                                                                                       a = eom && D~s S
                                                                                                                                                                  =
                                                                                                                                                =5 2
                                                                                                                                                                                        = Ps f©e
                                                                                                                               4                                         ;                                                                              A
ge                                                                                L
                                                                                               g2                                                                                                                                                             fn
                                                                                                                                                                                      =
                                                                                                                                                                  =                                                                                   oon                foo
    k fy                                                          _
                                                                                                                                                                 ianel nw)
                                                                                                                                                                                        2 5d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ved     o ,        S                    hae
 A eo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ae
                                                                                               G
                                                                                                                       25         P2S 3                                                                                                                                                          SS ow
                                                                                                                     on
                                                                                          a
                                                                                                                                                                  eSo a) : iDaPn) Se-w) i                                                                      aDno So
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a,
                                                                                          a,                        o=                                    +                                                                                       a2:%
                                                                                                                                               oa
 O !                                           «               heae)                                   3             a       =
                                                                                                                                                                             e                                                                                       o~~                     shat
                                                                2
         ne
Bv G        . |                                                                                   =
                                                                                                  = 23 Ron                5  &     —     & .
                                                                                                                                   @ an ae ey
                                                                                                                                                         aq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 oeoas
 e eab vowyr so                                                                           D                                                                       a                                                                                            e                                             ft
 e S e dine Kd es
                                                                Ay
                                                                                          =      a    o o      =                   =        2:    &
                                                                                                                                                                  a                      r= 1 &/)                                                              i S©    sS                        oe     het
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "ees
 eeed cShe ao@eee
                                                               wawne
                                                                                          s     o5m S$ an ay
                                                                                                                    &       =                c                    x                                                                                   u6i)t                         pe=at         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  nesee,ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Soni
                                                                os                                                                 o           e      ¢=          o
                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               enn
                                                                                                                                                                       vRey)
                                                                                                                                                                     u
                                                                                                                                                                                        S                                                                                                        aiy , fi
                                                                                                                                 tO y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         =
                                                                                                                                                                          b=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ap)     ea) see
                                                                                                                                                          Ss                          er S So oA
                                                                teaas
                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                   n
                                                                                                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                                  yp
                                                                                  Tnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .‘eh
fan
                                                                                                              om
  ae e                                                                            k                             = t                @ — 2b                       i‘x2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  43
weed
              rs                                                                                                                                                                  i                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                                        i                                                                                     i as                             m
£                                                                Sd                                                  SwS y                                                         25                                                                       E)                      o: ne)     fen
              sed
                                                                                                                                                          S                            Sm= res ~3~a                                                                                            rs) e fred
                                                                ,                                                    g                                                                                                                                oar eS e
                      i
                                                                                  “aé
 a 232 Me
                                                                                                  -)                                             ‘a                                                                                                   “
                                                                                                  = ~
                       Lett
                                                                                                 g                                             5 me aa
                                                                                                                  t os .
                                 Net
                                                                                                      cl 64                                                                                                                                                                          ei
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               f$eiw
                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                             8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ee
                                                                                                                                                                                             ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       > g
   4                             ai
                                                                Soa                               Y                              nad                      o oa o                                                                                      f
                                                                                                                > an)ie
                                                                                                                                                          :
                                         ots,
                                                                                          a                                                                                                                                                           feveete et°
    ve       5                                                                           eo                     °3                             e                                                                                                                                              S                  e‘tsm
              Poe]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             aowe
                                                                                    oeS
                                         ae
 tee                                                                                                e    el                                n
 efogt
              ie      se4 es                                    zw)s                     = s                2                 =           ©   _       - )                                                                                                                                        m evesd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                   aas S                                                                                                                                                          © x
                                                                                                              =
                       oO Ha
                                 ai
                                                                                  “Sp        >
                                                                                                                  e                ai          oSSend o=x io                                                                                          eee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      feteoee     Fo nen bce)
                                                               Zioa                 O o28OS & c =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 w
                      ea
              o                          aA 4                                                                            a
                       e e h                                                                                                                                o 3)                                                                                                                                 a p
                           e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      os
                                                                                                                                          7p)
“                                       ae
                                                                                     ‘ N             S                     .
                                                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        as         =               e
                                        tes,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 fi eaieg fGoen
                                                                                                                                *
                          hele
                                                                                                                oon oO                        =~
                                                                                                                                         xas 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                               tee
                                                                                                                              3
wees     cad
                                                                                  aa              i                               io w)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cs          B2) ES o=S
                                                                                                                                           S xe) 2 2s
                                                                                                              ° Gs &
                                                                                                                                  f2ens               2                                                                                                                                               yen .
                                                               ia                                                                                        2
                                                                                         os
                                                                                                    = e
                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                  ae & eG 2                              So =                                                                                                                     CL                                             o,   ie
                                                               aa
                                                                                  = tSsg S A
                                                                                              ae
                                                                                                   Co
                                                                                                         a5
                                                                                                                    ~          D xan
                                                                                                                           E=—OS        -bf) oosn < naG     8                                                                                         a        O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .                           aetnn e d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 o @
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ea
                                                               aBos                                                                                                                                                                                            & w
               4                                                pri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   =
                                                                              a                                                    &                  nny
                                                                                                                                                          y                                                                                                    22= bere
                                                                                          b ‘i=y caSn &2mt (8b ex g . EaE                      =                                                                                                  o rea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4o
                                                                                                                ©
                                                                                                                                                    a2o BuPrA >
                                                                                                                                                                    :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8s                             e
                                                                wate
                                                                                  N                                                                                                                                                                            *.                                a e
                                                                                             ae ie
                                                                                                                                                           =4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               23=% Ve
                                                                Ge
                                                                ae ets
                                                                        rae
                                                                                     2                               S Y ey             F           S
                                                                                                                                                                   k                                                                                                                         ‘be                 So
                                                                                                                =      Y                                                                                                                          m sed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Send
                                                                                                wD
                                                                toes epte                pe                                                   E             c o )  2egs                                                                               ea e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         s)                                   b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ts ed
                                                                                                                     =  2= =e = B&a e EEE
                                                                                                              lr
                                                                                  om                                               Q
                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %      — ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              bn             I
                                                                                   an 3   e       e    a
                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                     l       or ‘
                                                                                                                              =    cS a& &os 3
                                                                                                                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                                  .a =
                                                                                                                                                                  EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       o*n,    51 a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2 d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                  =                                                                                                                                                                                                  a
                                                   &   @
                                                                                          a  m e
                                                                                                            bSe    o                                  =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  vd Z         o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¢ S                  a4 3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2025
                                                                                          is        =                                                oy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                                                              5oO                                                                                                                                                              by =
                                                                                                                                                           o . r _
                                                           &
                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 @
                                                                                                                         _                     &                                                                                                                                     ==
                                                                                                                                          EEwet 2_2 rernyt eQvs ss
                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                  —Fs     3                                                                                                                                                        =
                                                                                                                =             3                                  =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B855 a
                                                                                          “sf , a) Ss i
                                                                                  oe     7
                                                                                                                                                                                   mE E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Vv 3-
                                                                                                       =
                                                                                                         B 3
                                                                                                         ~                                                                 poe
                                                                                              s Spek ane    a  fm                                           e                                                                                     ¢
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S   8
                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                            Es ss=
                                                                                                                                                                                               ©
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              vA ES
                                                                                                                                                                      ~
                                                                                                            Soeo ; =                                                               aid             '>        r
                                                                                            nnn                                                                            &                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                                                             om
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 °
         ay
              me) emergin 3 Essues
                 =~

                                                  7



   The Consulting team shall prepare a technical memorandum that addresses several emerging
   issues that will be important to consider during the TSP update p ro] ect. As a part of the
    ~
   B Meron gf ssues memo, the Consultant team shall d OScri be the iSS ue and the approach to
    v7


   addr essing the item dur in g the TSP updat € proj ect. Below P i iS a list of iS sues to be addressed as
   emerging issues.




                                                                                                                                                                                              Poy



                                                                                                                                                                                                        fe
                                                                                                                                                       OO

                                                                                                                                                                    werk




                                                                                                                                                                                                         fot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                bin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‘i
                                                                                                                                                                            hess

                                                                                                                                                                                       dees
                                                                                                                                                 ‘eat
                                                                                                                                                 g
                                                                                                                                                 ffs,
                                                                                                                                                        wee ae

                                                                                                                                                        Ps
                                                                                                                                                                        eg
                                                                                                                                                                             nr

                                                                                                                                                                                        fr

                                                                                                                                                                                              Awe     tee




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ify
                                                                                                                                                 th

                                                                                                                                                        fn




                                                                                                                                                                                  feet




                                                                                                                                                                                                            ras,
                                                                                                                                                        at




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      aay
                                                                                                                                                                                       | EE
                                                                                                                                                                                        ERR
                                                                                                                                                                                        ;



                                                                                                                                                                                                                 efears




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   petite,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   chews




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              oyCe)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  eet
                                                                                                                                                            PA



                                                                                                                                                                              CARA
                                                                                                                                                                                  OH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HEse eyweed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         baba




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nnn


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              dyed, Ciera
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ”
                                                                                                                                                            dee wae




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                 Hes



                                                                                                                                                             ey



                                                                                                                                                                    py




                                                                                                                                                                                              OA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    er]pew
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ete
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    we

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       yn,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pew,
                                                                                                                                                             treed
                                                                                                                                                  SAE          tng




                                                                                                                                                                                                      weed
                                                                                                                                                                                              raw




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   fi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ‘i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         te




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        heel
                                                                                                                                                   reai
                                                                                                                                                    ree

                                                                                                                                                    ‘eat

                                                                                                                                                                   tt
                                                                                                                                                                   oe



                                                                                                                                                                                  een,
                                                                                                                                                                                            ee



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        beegaewee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       @




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       OG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ot
                                                                                                                                                                    adae




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                                            -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              J,
                                                                                                                                                                            capa eee
                                                                                                                                                                                       were ‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EEE
                                                                                                                                                                        ysdey




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ahs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   papi



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Oh,
                                                                                                                                                      hed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ches




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Po
                                                                                                                                                      “re




                                                                                                                                                                                              is)Le
                                                                                                                                                       Ge
                                                                                                                                                       Be
                                                                                                                                                               ge




                                                                                                                                                                                   ‘ee

                                                                                                                                                                                         ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                      te
                                                                                                                                                                                                      es

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       oA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ba   oy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         eee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         gen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           my
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Teds
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ora
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ch beatea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   fen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   era
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   weg
                                                                                                                                                               gn


                                                                                                                                                                              ‘fs



                                                                                                                                                                                              oi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   is!se
                                                                                                                                                             ad

                                                                                                                                                               PP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‘ea




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       on

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   °
                                                                                                                                                               beter
                                                                                                                                                      Nonny!




                                                                                                                                                               oe
                                                                                                                                                      HARE,
                                                                                                                                                      ret
                                                                                                                                                      peed
                                                                                                                                                                OF




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       etwewf

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Meee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 aed
                                                                                                                                                                                   on
                                                                                                                                                                                       OScf
                                                                                                                                                                                       tn,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ore,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tit,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              wa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (eH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               eb
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ",
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                             .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ed
                                    Fcc
                                  re]


                                     a3
                                         berks
                                      hd




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    aie




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       het
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        wee
                                  Prd
                                    (th
                                    ae
                                         Gj




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              we

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Gex



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        fee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sat




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tea!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           et
                                       *




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  zy
                                  weed




                                                                                                                                                                                       when




                                                                                                                                                                                                           aeepeeneore




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           news
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rare:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    en

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rapee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ee




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oo
                                                                                                                                                                        ant




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      hed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     jeww
                                    Vas
                                    a




                                                                                                                                                                             ey

                                                                                                                                                                                        on
                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                                                               SS
                                                                                                                                                                                               ye
                                                                                                                                                                                               .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          vea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       fet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      et



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             raed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                co

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ooChat
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      As
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            As
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       yes




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ied

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      teal
                                                                                                                                                                         :




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           43




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       See
                                                                                                                                                                              o
                                       4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                    arada)
                                       oe
                                       wed
                                  ad




                                                                       Ph
                                                      (ered,
                                                         Yip,
                                                               eared
                                                                 fon,

                                                                         pr,
                                                                             A
                                                                                 f as




                                                                                               REA




                                                                                                        ee,
                                                                                                             fits,
                                                                                                                ‘cont
                                                                                                                     On,
                                                                                                                        fire
                                                                                                                        Spe,
                                                                       gl
                                                                         atte,




                                                                                                        Saiew!
                                                                                         rahh
                                                                                        ‘eat



                                                                                                     fen
                                                                                                         C
                                                                                    ae


                                                                                                 tant
                                                                                                     fea,
                                                                                                           ai
                                                                                    rd
                                                         A



                                                                         ore)
                                                      vere,




                                                                                                     sip




                                                                                                                                                ood
                                                                                                     weet




                                                                                                                                            ad
                                                          weet
                                                               oes,
                                                                 e4
                                                                       Che
                                                                           “en
                                                                             tad
                                                                                 ray
                                                                                    ten
                                                                                    yes
                                                                                        fra,
                                                                                          fhe
                                                                                               eed
                                                                                                 fea

                                                                                                         0d
                                                                                                         won
                                                                                                        ‘Sra
                                                                                                                 ny
                                                                                                                     bead,
                                                                                                                        od
                                                                                                                              ‘La
                                                                                                                              La
                                                                                                                                    Ls
                                                                                                                                       ae
                                                                                                                                         Sad


                                                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                      tev
                                                                                                                                                      ges
                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                          oe



                                                                                                         tetas



                                                                                                                             or
                                                                                                         , ts,




                                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                             ‘et




                                                                                                                                  ty
                                                               é
                                                      need
                                                      pte
                                                      pee
                                                      So




         3.1 Bac ker ound Information
                          ‘
                              ‘

                                    ,
         32 Draft t and Final Transportation Planning Rule (TPR) Memo
                 32.1
                   Baseline TSP Planned Project List and E nhance R QViCW Audit Append Ces
         33 Draft and Fina J Metro 2023 R egion al Transportation Plan Memo
         34 Draft and Final Local Plan S urmmaries (Comple ted or Underway} Memo                                                                                        t



         35 Dra ft and ate a | Emerging Issues Memo

4. TASK 4 INTERAGENCY *
                      6                                                                        COORDINATION
   The purpose of this Task is to ensure that coordination occurs be tween agencie s and that projects
   of regional s i Ord ificance are appropriately included on the Re giona { Capital Project list. The two
                                             we

   primary yelements of th 15 task are Jur Sh dG ict onal Coord ination and ODOT 77 Other A >G £91818) y y Pro ject                                                                                                                                               i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      i


    ~
   C oord mati on, The coordination should al SC AT clude coord ination wt th tribal governments, Metro,
    “a



   and transit providers.



                                                                                                                                                 Page 18
       Coordmation with the cities within Clackamas County is essential for several reasons. First, there
       are county-maintained roads within local city limits. Offen cities will have identified future
       projects on these facilities that are appropriate when urbanization occurs. Secondly, some cities
       have identified transportation projects on their city TSPs that are outside of their city limits. It
       will be important fo have a discussion on how these projects should be represented in the county
       TSP. Finally, there are some transportation system projects located within city limits that may be
       impacted by travel patterns outside of their cities.
       Meeting with local jurisdictional partners should include a process for projects located within
       concept planning areas, projects on county-maintained facilities within city limits and other
       projects that cities have identified as needed outside of their city limits within unincorporated
       Clackamas County. A memo shall be developed to identify an approach to how the issues will be
       addressed during the TSP update project. In addition, there should be meetings with tribal
       governments and Metro to ensure project coordination.
              ay  SVEN ONT    eye
                                    Xo Sewns em RO  3      :            ha SA ep        s oe
          &     PSE   SE SE   BRN ow  KM ASIN   N AE    RRaTON
                                                        RENTSTe   See
                                                                  SCAMASA
                                                                              ss   he
                                                                                        Nera
          4g     QP EAF   £   GALLS   SRO   RUIDIAR     DRE UPL   LAE    Aaa             Ue


       Coordination with ODOT regarding projects identified on ODOT facilities is essential. The
       current TSP Table 5-3D -~ Regional Capital Projects will need to be updated to incorporate the
       appropriate projects located in unmecorporated Clackamas County that are not on County
       maintained facilities.
       Coordination meetings shall be held with ODOT stalf to cover topics such as review of existing
       project lists, input ito future conditions, and compliance with TPR requirements as they relate to
       ODOT facilities. The consultant team will be responsible for cataloging comments and
       recommendations provided by the reviewing agencies and governments.
       As a part of the development of the Regional Project List, meetings with transit providers should
       be held to discuss potential projects that should be inchided in the TSP review.
       os     yoyo.          :      .NAE
        Pavols  fe   Manoritent       Dahir    hin
       PUSH
          ga
                 Se COIS
                eee   Sy
                         UE Lor
                         SPIEL PERT
                                     Pere
                                     FSET IEA
                                              POs
                                               Pe ee




         41 Drafi/Final Jurisdictional Coordination Memo
         42 Draft and Final ODOT and Regional Project Coordination
              421 Draft and Final Intergovernmental Coordination Process Memo

      TASK 3: FINANCIAL FORECAST AND COST ESTIMATING                                           PROCESS
fad
we

       The Task will set the foundation for compliance with TPR Section 660-012-0040 (Transportation
       Financing Program) as well as become the starting place for the actions required by TPR
       Sections 660- 012-0155 through 0180 (Prioritization Framework and Reduced VMT,
       Unconstrained Project List and Financially Constrained Project List).
       The financial plan for the updated TSP will be based on a long-range forecast of revenues and
       expenses that will be developed by the County and provided to the consultant team. The forecast
       will inchude all Jocal, regional and state revenuc sources and a detatied analysis of expenses
       including maintenance and operations expenses. This will be a financial plan for the expenditure
       on County facilities.
       The financial plan will include current and historical (most recent 5—10-year period) revenue
       sources that have funded the maintenance and improvement of the transportation system and
       historical expenditures that have supported the transportation system. The forecast will conform
       to the requirements of the TPR (OAR 660-012-0115). The consultant staff will prepare a draft
       process for parametric estimating the cost of road improvement projects. This process will be
       reviewed by staff before if is used during Project Prioritization task.

       Rey 3-2025                                                           Page 19
                      ond      ?hese? + Pas  de      x
                     P“vyereys
                     yy.
                                   mar     Gefiverg:
                                             fax  :
       wh i   Bs: * LOPESEI         COE   Pre   nVve    rag    pigs


     “54 Review of the detailed financial plan from 2025 to 2045
       52 Draft and Final Project Cost Estimation Process


6   FASK 6: VISION, GOALS, OBJECTIVES, PERFORMANCE                                                         STANDARDS AND
    EVALUATION CREPERIA

        6.1 Vision, Goals and Objectives
     Building on the information gathered in Task 3: Policy and Planning Framework, as well as any
     activities within the Community Engagement Plan, the consultant shall draft an updated Vision
     and Goals.
     Ultimately, the vision and goals must be structured in a way that informs relevant, strategic,
     actionable policies in support of Statewide Planning Goal 12, “to provide and encourage a sale,
     convenient, and economical transportation system.”
                     Ty           ormance                                         Ce: Caan a y
        6.2 § Sey                                       cWPR
                          reste




                                                                           bere
              wget




                                                               See
                                                  coe




                             POPP
                               Veo ya
                                      ance       St Peuerer ay
                                                                     roe




                                                                           iL     av CARAMA




     system performance measures and standards are central to identifying the gaps and deficiencies
     in the transportation systems, as well as for guiding transportation sysiem imvestmenis during the
     development process. Performance standards will be an important tool for determining if the
     transportation system will function in a manner consistent with county policies.
     The existing measures included in Comprehensive Plan Chapter 5 - 5.8 System Performance
     Policies and other policies within the TSP that indicate modal deficiencies shall be summiarized.
     The system performance measures from the Metro Mobility Policy and the TPR will need to be
     addressed. [f performance standards have been identified within various modal plans, such as the
     Walk Bike Clackamas Plan or the TSAP, these standards and measures should be incorporated.
     Finally, the system performance measures should be reviewed through the Safe Systems
     Approach lens to make sure safety is adequately integrated into the system performance
     measures.
     A technical memo shall be developed that addresses above information and how it will be used
     within the process to identify gaps and deficiencies im the roadway system, summarize the
     process used to identify gaps and deficiencies for other modes during them most recent planning
     processes, address any additional measures recommended or required to be used and finally,
     identify draft changes to the System Performance Policies within the TSP.
     As a part of this Task, the consultant will facilitate discussions with staff regarding how the
     system performance measures are used within the context of the development process. This will
     include a review of ZDO Section 1007.07 Transportation Facilities Concurrency, how if
     implements the performance standards in the TSP and the Traffic Impact Study requirements in
     the Roadway Standard document.
                               Ls     o,
                       ahuation      ¢ x itey
        6.3              furehhitaes As Pee
                                                              he
                                                              m,




     The TSP Vision, Goals and Objectives will be used to guide the evaluation criteria assessment
     that informs the project prioritization. In addition, input from the Task 3.1 Technical Memo
     summarizing TPR guidance on project priortization will also shape the evaluation criteria.
     Consultant will develop a draft set of outcome-based transportation evaluation criteria to address
     the larger transportation system issues arising from the TSP Vision, Goals and Objectives


     Rey 3-2025                                                                                  Page 20
      developed in Task 6.1 and 6.2. The consultant will outline a methodology and data requirements
      of using each outcome-based evaluation criteria.
      Teryods
       feyek a
       BSF       Oe
                 fe
                 eie  fPmamonsitermnt
                         amerifermnt                        Delivers
                                                            Pholvporrdhlos       bles
      §UQSS&     OS gsOEISUI
                          CPi Er ee COE
                                     ee ed                 BASES
                                                           CaO    APES
                                                                 Teyve PgPag EPS
                                                                              oresees


         6.1 Dratt and Final Vision, Goals, and Objectives Memo
         6.2 Performance Standards and Measures
             e Facilitation of work group meetings with County staff for performance measures
             e Draft and Final Comprehensive Plan Section 55: Motor Vehicle Capacity Standards
                  Update Memo
             ® Draft and Final 7D0 Section 1007.07 Recommended Changes Memo
         6.3 Draft and Final Evaluation Criteria Memo

7,   FASK 7: ANALYSIS METHODS                                                                                                         AND ASSUMPTIONS
      With input from the TAC, the Consultant shall develop a technical memorandum outlining the
      analysis methods and assumptions. The memo must describe analytical procedures that will be
      used to evaluate existing conditions, future conditions, and alternatives analysis. This proposal
      shall include the estimated number of intersections that will be analyzed, as well as other types
      of real time data that can be accessed via RITIS or other sources.
      The technical memo for this task shall address how the Safe Systems Approach will be
      integrated into the analysis methods and assumptions. In addition, it should address tf there are
      specific aspects of how technology could impact future travel and how that is integrated into the
      assumptions.
      Consultant shall provide an overview summary of the methodologies and assumptions for the
      current and future conditions and solutions for the following:
                                 rare                 °
                                                      caeeeca        y8           =
                                                                                  et                 eer
                                                                                                    ye)         cal              ‘              faq          “8
                                                                                                                                                        waretiy           op    <    ~~ eNk                 wa        Sato
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      hegtea        i8         TaskSoeSek ers     BV     SPR      eae         eS    apenmp   gyoy Syby oyoe      -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 eed ay
                                 AF              YARRA . YSES                                   FOE            ASS         BY                   GS      WES               o& YOCRMS                     OFF SATAY ANG                                   SSMIONMS          PRIEPY                   CFASHESS                      ANG
                                  4




                                               wee
                                          a
                                 he
                  bi




                                       pee
                                          Bs
                                  e




                                 imei
                                 SQSRAR               and resiomal
                                                     SPERMS PON SASRSaRE                                        Siok
                                                                                                                SNSRES               Dohire
                                                                                                                                     SRESLAN YY corrigars
                                                                                                                                                Case PRRs
                        .        So yeootenays
                                    ew de                   sto          eeu           vom
                                                                                       eatint             ae                x
                                                                                                                      aAraenSareca                ga   &&    Si          By
                                                                                                                                                                       epPS           =
                                                                                                                                                                               Pay vacweas                       =2   Sxcoyaxend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        weee   weet
                  §              SYSTEM
                                  3                        COST
                                                             3                                                        AMA 3 VSES FOP                                   AAs FROES                            OF         LP AVES
                                 VUoak                Rages               ep agen
                                                                             eg ce dy                                        Rexel. stsecesaver                                           X Soromdesk                                    seen Rodices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ea      ad         -      I §                      es                              s
                  SY
                   S               Fame
                                        EYRECASAP ARAN s VSS, PECULIAR . EP ANSEL
                                              seve      eee               ca       dress                          Mee       evi                             fereu
                                                                                                                                                               ws aad
                                                                                                                                                                                     GREE Dereny
                                                                                                                                                                                       gout
                                                                                                                                                                                            PPV    ogta
                                                                                                                                                                                                    =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ht
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PER          OPIEYdar AMG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sauda    ose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LPO Sy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ot Sasvcas oxi:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 “                       ACCESS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7 att
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Boy


                                 Say     otysatavdean®                    ax           wrcnega cs
                                 ERQUMSUE RAL APEAS
                                        ster ote                          ak          Wek


                                 yy            av en B              38           8                      3X             i         eeweeks                           a          or——               rarySeon
                  soe            SPOsabiUSER
                                 BA      cabana ist                              ie cast
                                                                                 IASC’                           BATS”
                                                                                                               VINES                 Per          see estes
                                                                                                                                                  CANS                           oa pen
                                                                                                                                                                              COMO                      BRATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                      LAOS,
                  ®8             Psst
                                 RoBSR afserfarmance
                                       VER PSEIS SRST SSR CREAR LT standaras
                                                                   SRR SEMA CES Rey                                                                               ang
                                                                                                                                                                  CRARRS        respective
                                                                                                                                                                                SCOURS    YRS caicuiation
                                                                                                                                                                                              Cade CASK CRESS mothadalinsisas
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SESE LISRSRILIS UIR Sy                                                                                 ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GAS be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RI              uses
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ASRS
                                 Sen     Shea         OTOHge
                                 IM THe                Fs
                  3              SS osevicgyey fb fecauaed esrestiold warcinse                                                                                          face      ym nti
                  s              RAS. RUAMS ESSE VESEY    ES SSAESRRET ES YEE SAGES FfF                                                                                 xk Sos AS SAAS3 RRCSER SS,

                   ~              &
                                  Mowawa NYfaases RF badge                       a
                                                                                 faves     ae
                                                                                           Sao                 wee ew Byebag kdioae
                                                                                                                              oa x
                                                                                                                                 fea     :
                                                                                                                                     gvewes &                                  <
                                                                                                                                                                               tee            7Seakom                    cen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      cased         Be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    fesovea YH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            hd Soy sow giles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ds ts                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            eee         xod
                  8S             ASP           ACADIS                            CYaiie                        WOOMTY                       a
                                                                                                                                                  TAP ROELS  a
                                                                                                                                                                               FOP       STATS                    AMG               NCas                FACIES)             AYN
                                 BM       Ba
                                        WSN Set owe oS   MAY   x    and                             3                      BwR        Bev
                                                                                                                              Sys sh ogee es Foeodtencs            Y    esevend               ey R                     a       as                        grower                    a                WaPo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BAY ees R Re VRSE
                  SB                   WEESEEEROG   AL ANALYSES,                                                           PYRCHIAUNS        LEVEE’AE OYehh                                      F evee Pie ox
                                                                                                                                                                                                   PARNEC       Swe
                                                                                                                                                                                                               SEPESS                                    es o8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LA. Ps        Seroeyen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TP GYYE Fhe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EES                  VV AEN       Sy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SERS koe
                                 Saskearias
                                 SAC MS EESS                                     Bian
                                                                                 Faas

      In addition, Consultant shall summarize data and analytical methods required to evaluate
      greenhouse gas reduction, performance measures and targets as defined in OAR 660-012-0900
      through OAR 660-012- 0910, as well as any requirements from the Metro 2023 RTP. Consultant
      shall coordinate with County staff, ODOT Climate Office and Metro staff on this task.
      Consultant shall coordinate with County staff, ODOT representatives and Metro to determine
      reasonable growth assumptions for future traffic conditions and document the operational
      County standards for transportation facilities. The draft technical memorandum shall be reviewed
      and approved before the existing conditions and needs analysis is conducted.
             oy               o ae oveiboses
                                       dewea vi :               z         ye :                      sos
                             fag
             i?             .
                            CLAUS OS
                                    ee
                                               Pie
                                                            Pieoehvernhies
                                                            BOGE Ve  LESS


      7.1 Draft and Final Metro Model U pdate Request Memo
         7.2 Draft and Final Analysis Methods and Assumptions Memo
      Rey 3-2025                                                                                                                                                               Page 21
&   FASK 8: EXISTING CONDEPIONS AND                                                                           REEDS ARALYSIS
     The TSP will include an analysis of existing conditions for all transportation systems, includmeg
     bridge and culvert information, within the county including roads, transit, bike, pedestrian, and
     freight facilities. For each of the five transportation modes the analysis should describe how the
     performance standards identified in Task 6 were used to quantify the existmg gaps or
     deficiencies in the system. Conduct operational analysis for up to 125 intersections Gnecluding
     new weekday p.m. peak hour counts, but not a.m. peak hour counts or analyses). The safety
     analysis will largely rely upon the TSAP update being prepared by B&N.
     For the Pedestrian and Bikeway systems the consultant shall use the existing conditions and
     project identification information that was developed as a part of the Walk Bike Clackamas Plan.
     For the Public Transportation System Planning, the most recent TriMet Forward Together
     service plan and the Transit Development Plan (TDP) shall be used.
     Consultant deliverables for Task 8 will be an existing condition report that includes cach madel
     ofthe system and describes the extent to which it meets the performance standards identified
     during Task 7. The analysis and mapping shall be prepared and presented in a way that can be
     used by the various areas of the County. The Existing Conditions Report should address how the
     requirements OAR 660-012-0800- 810 were addressed during this task.
     ?
     py,
                      cid
                       o
                          oy ORE     iterate .
                                     is          ry
                                                      Moliuyo
                                                 Pehyverg
                                                         ze
                                                                a   Bfes
                                                                    i?
                                                                       oD
           gk &       LOMSEcang                  £eer ive:                ae)

     “81 Draft and Final E xisting Conditions Memo
       &2 Existing Conditions GIS Files

%   TFASK 9: FUTURE                                   CONDITIONS                            AND       PROJECT            IDENTIFICATION

           9.1 Future Deficiencies and Needs

     As apart of the Future Conditions analysis, the consultant shall use the performance standards
     decided upon in Task 6 and the Analysis Methods from Task 7 to identify future travel demand,
     facility needs and deficiencies and locations where the performance standard have not been met.
     This analysis should also document the needs of underserved populations, including youth,
     people with disabilities, people of color and people with low incomes per the requirements of the
     TPR and RTFP.
                   ry
                   Ny              -    can   —        xRey aS
                                              oe OYeS SPVIYTVN    .
                   *LPP   SVP      ELS
                                     SA eeaes       7          ny
           a       FoR    OVS
                          AS               A     SO     PLS         EAS
                               a




     The consultant shall prepare proposed solutions for the identified needs. A list of the draft future
     transportation improvement projects for all modes will be developed, for both the County and the
     ODOT systems. Included in this list will be projects in the adopted 2013 TSP that have not
     begun the project development process, projects identified in adopted/approved plans prepared
     since 2013, projects suggested by the public through the Public Engagement process and tribal
     consultation and projects identified by the consultant team and TAC.
           g   F   Pea
                   pa Feb
                          rroakhalicikenen            A FRA                        War      ts 3 rae she ~A    comeerm   ant   few       ble    h,RSCRAR
                                                                                                                                                    an      Area
           3.        SELLSeQeeari EErei gas ee Sas
                                                eis ed
                                                    oY    M                     "     mer
                                                                                a ierey
                                                                                            4g
                                                                                             Xs RBS ae a
                                                                                                              RQQEICSMANT
                                                                                                              ASSOSSTNISHE     rey
                                                                                                                                Pa.FP,   Phe
                                                                                                                                         AS S              OAR Dek


     During this Task, the consultant shall also calculate the No-Build Horizon Year houschold-based
     light vehicle VMT per capita consistent with the definition in OAR 660-012-0005(64) and in
     OAR 660-012-0160. Consultant shall document all underlying modeling assumptions used, so
     that VMT per capita can be calculated and compared for the Horizon Year No-Build and
     financially constrained mvestment scenarios, if required per OAR 660-012-0160. The VMT per
     Capita caiculations are needed only for the urban area of the county.
     Rey 3-2025                                                                                               Page 22
       O14 Draft and F inal Fu
                            | uture - Conditions No-Build Memo
       92 Draft and Final Puture Conditions Build (with Baseline Projects) Memo
       93 Draft and Final ANernative Development and Analysis Memo
       94 Houschoid-based VMT per Capita assessment for Urban Area
       95 Future Conditions GES

19. TASK 10: PRIORITIZING SOLUTIONS
    In this task, the full list of up to 350 possible projects developed in Task 9 will be prioritized
    based on Evaluation Criteria Framework created in Task 6. Based on the financial plan and
    conceptual construction costs from Task 5, the projects should be divided into each of the
    priority groups:
                       ——          SRR                                    ay
               s~~     Beene
                       SELL  Te
                             AS              Pest  eggegtey
                                               SY ROPYSyY   <3
                                                     wy
                                    s
                                                            VM,
                                                     te
                                             rj
                                             ob      ant
                                                     is ee
                                                    cad
                                                     re     5
                                                           no
                                                             ny
                               ‘retest


                                           Perel,



                                                          Oteeth
                                                         vats
                                                    et


                                                            G ete,
                                             oy
                                                               £3
                                                    Yate   f,
                                                    var
                                                                    ue
                                                                   ad
                                                                         *)
                                                                "fe
                                   wy




    The maximum total cost of projects that can be mcladed in Tier 1: Priority 20- Year Capital
    Projects shall be no more than 125% of the total anticipated funds available and will be
    considered the constrained project list. The projects on ODOT facilities shall be prioritized by
    categorizing into high, medium and low priority on a separate list, the Regional Capital Project
    list.
    The first draft of the project lists and cost estimates will be submitted to Clackamas County
    Transportation and Development engineering staff for review and comments. The proposed
    project list will also be organized using tables and maps into a list for each of the county sub-
    areas. The project lists shall be reviewed as outhmed im the Public Engagement Plan and should
    include small inferdisoiplinary teams from each sub-areas of the county as a part of the review.


      101 Draft and Final Prioritized Project List for Tier 1, Tier 2, and Tier 3} County-wide and
      by GAP Memo
       102 Draft and Final Conceptual cost estimates Memo for up to 350 projects
       103 Prioritized project lists for cach Geographic Area Project (GAP) group
       104 GIS Maps for each GAP (county sub-areas)
       105 Future greenhouse gas emissions targets Gf needed)
       106 CFEC Enhanced Review for up to 10 projects
       10.7 Implementation of the Public Engagement Plan for the draft prioritized project list.

11. TASK 11: RECOMMENDATION                                                                    OF PRIORITIZED   PROJECT   LISTS FOR ALL
    SUBARERAS
    Following the public input on the draft prioritized project lists, the PMT, the PAC, and the TAC
    should be given all the prioritized project lists and recommendations for a single prioritized
    project list based on the input.
    ore)
      Pesois2s ?F 3
     Pease         2     sear Ye
                       9BIW                   2.
                                           e fof
                                         paar    gf}            bepe ;     nore? x
    SGSH     280%         IU                        hen                        tor   ig   es


  11.1 Draft and Final “Preferred. Solutions and Prioritize Project List Merno
  112 Presentation of the Preferred schutions to cormmittces (covered                                               i in Task £.3)

    Rey 3-2025                                                                                       Page 23
                                                                                 ND OTHER POLIC Y RE ¢ OMME NDATIONS
                                                                                                                                                    x
  12, FASK 12                                 PRO G RAMS
                                                                                                                                                                          ™
                                         *                                  B
                                         *                              x                                                                                                 -



             A Techn He al Mero shall be developed that includes Program and Policy So! Lions i or th C ISSUCS
             identified in the Task 3 Technical Memorandum. This shall include, but not be | 1 ed to
                                              ;




         12.1 Dratt and Final Programs and Policy Recommendations Memo             ra
         12.2 Draft and Pinal Proposed
                                                                                        jana




                                                                                                                                              rm
                                                                                                                                              ne
                                                                                                                        par




                                                                                                                                                                    3




                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                            S
                                                                                          2
                                                                                                    oe




                                                                                                                                 =
                                                                                                                                 S




                                                                                                                                                                    SS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      =
                                                                                               al




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                     cS




                                                                                                                                                                                                       rs
                                                                                                        :
                                                                                                        Q3
                                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                                          =




                                                                                                                                                        =

                                                                                                                                                            =
                                                                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                                                                     -



                                                                                                                                                                                          S     =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a>
                                                                                    7




                                              DRAFT TRANSPORTA
                                                                                                                                 ne




                                                                                                                                                                                  of
                             er




                                                                                                                       cofo




                                                                                                                                                                        poco
              ee7)




                                                                                                                          =)
specs,




                                                                                                                                 a

                                                                                                                                              =
                                                                                                                                              NL




                                                                                                                                                             =
                                                                                                                                                                    -


                                                                                                                                                                                  Zo
                     iN ¥



                                   o




                                                                                                                                                        zd




                                                                                                                                                                              :
         e




                                                                                                                                              a




                                                                                                                                                    ;
   f



             j




                              A




             The draft TSP products shall include
                                                                                                                        ns
                                             Pe

                                             nana
                                              Wo ween
                                              4
                                                d
                                                  ee
                                                  nee
                                                   wai
                                                       os
                                                       g
                                                       ai VORA
                                                          Sard
                                              gos
                                              wee
                                                  a
                                              poem
                                              HS
                                                geht,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              were
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Shenk
                                                    a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       et
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ‘*

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ig
                                                     web
                                                     cab
                                             ae




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                th
                                             tee




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ete
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ti
                                              ee
                                              OS
                                              bee
                                              eee




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  fe
                                                  nc
                                                  % 4,
                                                    St
                                                       wy,
                                                       aa, AEE
                                                       We
                                                        se




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              weed,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       owe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                oy
                                             Sangh            fg
                                                          ere,
                                             ety
                                                .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ape



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Gd


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘2pee MeEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            bidet
                                             Pr




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       dees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       chad




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              an,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              oy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              fe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    oho   oy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           gon eT,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ees een
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Me
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               an
                                             RR
                                             Lites
                                             a
                                             a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    hen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     eet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ord
                                               d




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rare
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Seles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              fegh




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        dct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ewe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ge




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SO senta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ay
                                                 gt
                                                 fan it ES




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ake,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ote




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tat
                                                      egg




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                fee


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          bes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     oe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        $8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Eo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              as




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Soe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ws

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              th
                                                          and
                                                            apa




             The draft TSP documents shall be pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 paw



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Seniniaia
                                                                                                                           ae


                                                                                                                                 Sain


                                                                                                                                                   af




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,O




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ial
                                                                                                                                                                Os



                                                                                                                                                                                                            Tm
                                                                                                                                                                                                               VS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   38SFe

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,,
                                                                                                                                                            i



                                                                                                                                                                     o,
                                                                                                                                                                     mt
                                                                                                                                                                                  1


                                                                                                                                                                                          a
                                                                                                                                                                                          a
                                                                                                                                                                                           S282  Fey

                                                                                                                                                                                                         bey




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        x
                                                                                                                                 “Css
                                                                                                                        2a3s



                                                                                                                                              aa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     eee    :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sass

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D>
                                                                                                                        > Ee S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    >

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                        ES he
                                                                                                                                                                                  *




             Proposed changes to th @ Exist
                                                                                                                                                                                      win
                                                                                                                                                            \ ox!
                                                                                                            sconiith




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ee

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =
                                                                                                        \/
                                                                                                         =f=
                                                                                               op 4%=




                                                                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                                                                                                      &£ oe
                                                                                                                                                                                       =
                                                                                                                                                                                          Snes


                                                                                                                                                                                                         gg




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              me



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             &@
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              =
                                                                                                                                                                                  o




                                                                            ad
                        strike-through f orm
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 wn

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ses
                  a)
                            .




                                             ~~
                            ut J




                                                                                                    ~


                                                                                                           med




                                                                                                                           ae




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        YL
                    cB)




                                                                                                        Ow




                                                                                                                                      -

                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                   2s
                                                                                                                                                        SA
                                                                                                                                                            a>




                                                                                                                                                                           &
                                                                                                                                                                                         ap 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                 fw

                                                                                                                                                                                                         O




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      QS on


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        om
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        @
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Fa
             a_

                         =
                              =
                                   Oo
                                   enn




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2me


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          opoes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     oO

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                >
             i




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               >
                    t




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                               J




             incorporation of changes,
                                                                                 on




                                                                                                                                                        pnond
                                                                                                                                                             =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OF)
                                                                                 end




                                                                                                                           ee




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     gd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 iy
                                                                                                                                        is}




                                                                                                                                                                                  Ly a)
                                                                                          3




                                                                                                                                                                    SB



                                                                                                                                                                                                         OD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a}

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        oS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ~
                                                                                                               =
             oe&.
             ae

                  =
                    oo
                    :




             In addition, the consultant team shall prepare a technic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ion!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   £=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                on




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        oa
                                                                                                                                                                              a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rn5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        arn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ap
                                                                                                                                                                                          oe
                                                                                                                                                                                           =
                                                                                                                                                                                            e¢      ey

                                                                                                                                                                                                         a3
                                                                                                                                                                                                            9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          uy)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       By




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                me
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         =>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ;
                                                                                                                                                                                   a




                                                           hthe TPR and
                                                                                           2
                            —
                            c=




                                                    a




                                                                                               =

                                                                                                                        pe=
                                                                                                                                 =
                                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                   sna



                                                                                                              —
                                                                                                             E©
             >
             °
              ©
              =3
                    am


                              2
                                   a




                                                                                                                           :




                  1 3 1 Draft Trans portation System Plan products
                         a. Storvboard meeti ng of onl ae) e Ts P wireii Tame
                                                                   oa
                                                                                                                                                                          WE              h County staff       7

                                   b. Draft and Final Draft Online TSP Wireframe
                                   c. Draft and Final Draft TSP Document
                                   Amnotated Outline

                                                                                                                                              Page 24
                 d. Draft and Final Draft TSP Document (electronic only)
           132 Draft Comprehensive Plan Chapter 5:
           Transportation System Plan
                 a. Storyboard meeting of Comprehensive Plan Chapter 5: Transportation System Plan
                 format and annotated outline with County staff
                 b. Draft and Final Draft of Comprehensive Plan Chapter 5: Transportation System
                 Plan (electronic only)
           13.3 Draft and Final TSP Compliance with the TPR and Metro RT FP Memo


14, TASK 14: FINAL TRANSPORTATION                                                  SYSTEM PLAN, PUBLIC HEARINGS AND
    ADOPTION
    In this task the final steps of the process to review and adopt the updated TSP will be completed.
    Clackamas County staff will be the lead at Planning Commission and Board of County
    Commissioner public hearings.
    The consultant team will be responsible for assistance with the preparation of materials,
    handouts, exhibits and presentations for use by county staff during the adoption process.
    The consultant team will develop a site for online TSP content to support the County website.
    This work will include an outline, site map of structure and navigation, Figma prototype, and
    content including alternative text, graphics, and editing. The consultant team will also provide up
    to 10 hours of support as the County transitions content to their own platforms.
     ay    as fey 3   A
                      Aa   oY oo ae coed beviat
                           Pesan              coy ee   F .beste
                                                            a.  sa
                                                                 reoers y steve
                                                                              as
     fee      ae    gah       FART      Eee FF fog     yee     Pree  ea was  oe
     POSH        £4        COSI    SOOO          I     Give           ra ores


                   141 Draft and Final Presentation Materials (7 Display Boards and one PowerPoint slide deck
                       with up to 30 slides} for Planning and Commission and the Board of Commissioners
                   142 Final electronic TSP docurnent and appendices
                   143 Final online web narrative and graphics for County use
                   144 Final online website content development

15. Contingency Tasks
    The consultant team will provide up to three CFEC compliance memorandums addressing -0830
    compliance for projects beyond those quantified in the non-contingency scope.
    The consultant team will provide up to five additional virtual project coordination meetings, with
    the PMT or other meeting groups as appropriate. Meetings will be virtual and not to exceed 1
    hour. Consultant shali provide a written agenda to PMT at least 5 business days prior to the
    meeting, and draft visuais or slide deck materials at least 2 business days prior to the meeting.
    Consultant shall submit meeting summary notes within 5 business days afier each meeting.
    The consultant team will provide up to three additional project evaluation and cost estimate
    packages of up to filteen additional projects each (ex. a total of 45 projects across 3 memoranda).
     wh



                      {5.1 Up to 3 $15,000 CFEC Compliance Memorandums
                      15.2 Up to $ Additional Virtual Project Coordination Meetings
                      15.3 Up to 3 Project Evaluation and Cost Estimate Packages of up to 15 Addttional Projects




    Rey 3-2025                                                                       Page 25
             EAHUEBIT B
              BUDGET




Rey 3-2025      Page 26
                                                                                                                                                                                    OO'SELG          Go LRNUOD JUOpUsdspuT) sodTAIOS UONL[SURIT,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (10}0eNUIOZ JUDpuadopuy)
                                                                                                                           00°0rTS$
                                                                                                                              :                               ISAPRUY SID           QOS ETS                     SOOLAIOS UONLISULI], UONe]IOeJ-00
                                                                                                                           00°SOI$
                                                                                                                           00'LPIS
                                                                                                                                                         rue} [Ao] Anu
                                                                                                                                              rooulsuy o8pug joao] Anuy             00 081$
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   dopuy) zo1enmpoe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                (do}9eNUOD Juopusdopuy)     Joyw[ION
                                                                                                                           OO OFIG        sISUIsUq AeMpeoy [oAdT ANU                00'00T$                                                voddns urupy
                                                                                                                           TA                                  a                    00SETs                                           WOSTLT] JWOWOS LSU
                                                                                                                              ;                                                     00°SSI$                                              Joseuew joofo1g
                                                                                                                           00°S07$
                                                                                                                           00°SLT$                         JoOUISUAAempeoy
                                                                                                                                                         roomduq      OSsplig       00°S81$                                  Tj 2osvueur joofoid 1o1Ms¢
                                                                                                                           00°87z$                               rouueyg Is         00°S7Z$                                    ] zoseueut jooford JommE¢
                                                                                                                           OO'SETG            —-FOOUTBU, royeg 2p OUYeAL 4S                                         Said
                                                                                                                           00°CS7$                      TOOUISUY OSPLig IS          LV 6CT$                        Jodopoaoq/SHUSIOS Bye JOINS
                                                                                                                           00'SETS$                  TooUIsUT ABMpROY IS            6S CLI$                     ULIOIUOO], oIBMIJOS / IsATeUY BIE
eel                                            (sonrunuruuod                                                                                      Ne                                69 E11$                                             uoddng 0130
        PoATOSIOpUN 19Y}0 “IOTUNS) UOSTeTT JuOMTOSeSUq                                                                                                                              rl 061g                                      UeTOTUOS], B1e1ID0ssy
691                  (OSOWLIOTA     ) WOSTeTT JUOWMOSeSUA                                                                  OL TIT$                         > UOneNSTUIUpY           Br rsIs                                          ULIDIUYOOT, JOTUIS
691                        (OLAvIS) UOsTerTy jUoUTosesug                                                                   Ec Shls$                        5 COWS                   LCs                                                   [J werormysoy,
691                     (Qsouly)) WOsTeT] JuOUTOSesUq                                                                      SErE$         TZ IsyeLoods uouroApOAUT OQNG          =    ZETI TY                                               ] UeroTUYySy,
691                       (xune’]) uostery juowosesuq                                                                      ITG6II$       EAstTeHOodg JuowoajoauT ONGNd              §=—=_Z"EETS                                isdyeuy uoneodsuery,
e1l               (uosyHopory usdnq) yoddns ‘urupy                                                                         LOThIS         p ISHBIOodS juouoAJoAUT ONAN              —_-gG'ESTS                                      rouub] q/sooursug
PI                       (SuoyQ YH) 1oseueur yoolorg                                                                       Lys9I$         ¢ Iteloods juouoAfoauT ONAN               =—_.9°06T$                                roUU] d/J9oUIBU JOSS
                                                 :                                                                         £9 06I$       9 qstpersodg JUSUTOATOAUT ST[Qnd           90° €E€7$                              JOUUL] {/I9UIS UA d]B1ID0Ssy
LI                (Mbp Surg) Joseueyy 199fo1g 1oTMIag                                                                      18°€07$                        [ WwIOOssy IONIES         §~=——_gQg'
                                                                                                                                                                                         6S 7                              Jouue] g/ooulsugq [edroutig
OrI                     ( [eNprlAlpuy)     voneoryisse[D qor                                                               Ib Sbz$                        Z UPIOSSYW OMS            80 667$                       Jouue] g/Isoursuq jedroutig ote
O81                     CTEMPIAIPU) HORBOYISSED AOL                                                                                                wll                              a > ae
FRE              (MOYsnIH uA) dUuULTg UONewodsueLy,
961         (USYg eIPUdy]) JOOUIsUY Moyes 2? oyFeLL                                                                                                                                                   210Y WEIS Aq Saley ese1OAY
                        JoTYyO       TM)    1OOUISU   OSprI
—                    conn ve               ety a                     MUI    LET    = EFL   =— HOOD         FT TOP'TEL‘TS               %00T                               AQUISUIIUO) + AQUISUIUOD-UON [BIOL                                       |
zy                                  CSE CS                            %I     %0T     %T       %88         L8ThT UIs            %9                                                                                 sysey Aoussimu0)                 Ne)
[7                                        COME,                      WOW    WET     VST    — O'S           LTBSTITI"TS                  Yr6                                      Aguas UyUO,)-UON [R01                                             P|
éIc                                      CE)                          %0      %9     %0       %r6         OL BIF9LS            %b                                   uondopy pure ssutmeoy o1qng “urfg WoIskg uoneodsuer] eu,
16                                           ComNST                   %0     %bT     %0       %98         EL 6LY'F9$           %b                                                                 uejd wisishg uoneuodsuell ye                      TT
08                                  (Cacnen ERE                       %0     %6T     %0       %IL         el e6r ces           %T                                                           suonepusumuossy AOT[O pue sueIsolg                      Fy
                                                                      %0     %ET     %0       %L8         16 9S8EI$            %T                                                 svoreqng [TV oJ sisr] 199/o1g Jo UoHepusuoDoy                     TT
coe                CEE)             OE)                               %0     %bS     %0       %9b         OLOPSLSI$            %6                                                                             suonnjos uoneznuold                   Fy
OF                 (OIA WISHED) T ate}oossy FOES                     %0      %l      %0       %6          S6TLIELG              —%b                                                               uonvoLyHUop] 100fo1g pur suoTIpUCD om,
E       (HOIOUIED ULL) FOdOTOASCASHUDIOS ILC FOROS                   %0)    iA       %0       %8B        «IP LTSESS =          GS                                                    uoneoynusp] yoolorg pue suomIpuoD Sunsixy PT
&                         (odsoup URAOT) | URFORMOOL                 %0     %El      %0       %LE          IS LOLEPS           ——-%E                                                          suondumssy pur spopoy sis<euy a
ve                    (SeMoT] Aru) ueFOHMTIOO | FOTOS                “0     %LE      “0       %EI           BSPSVELS           —-%bP                      BLIOILL) UONUNTRAG pue sprepuerg souvutopiog “soAnjoolgQ ‘sjeon ‘uoIsTA TY
91                        (XO qojeD)        sJsoUIsuY JOTUDg         “0     %T8      %()      %6I         Z0'OL8‘°8T$          %T                                                         Ssoo0lg SUNLUIMSY 1SOD pUe JsedeI0J TeIOULULY f                  S
BSP                 TO|ABL, ONES) WEFOMMOA, arvIossy The             %0      %0      %0      ~OOL         LEST ZI$             %I                                                                                    uoOHeUIpIOOD Aouaseiouy ET
8rI'T         (coftourg edemg) ysAjewy uoneyodsuery            |F3   0/0)    Mp      0)       496         +FE966STI$           %L                                                                           ylomourer Suruueyg pue Soog
pLe'l                            (Aepayqnog ssny) souueyd |=         %EE     %~0     %OF      “YLT       — EL'OELO6P$ = MOT                                                                                      WeIso1g UoUWDsesUg TqNd
ETI                     (1o8iNg BISLIY]) JooUIsSU IOIg                %8    al       %ST      %99         F6PESETES            %6I                                                                                          wowsseury oll, TT
€ZE                (uosjsneyT AT[a3[) odUIsSU oeIOOssyW              SMd    N3a      Vif    WOS|ONITS]        qyospng               $9).1NOSIY                                                           YSey
TZ            QYSIAA URsns) 10uTsUq Tedroulig 101g                                                          poyeulns|                  pofoig
819          (OeIoINg dIePL) 1s9UTSU_ [edroulg IoMIEs                                                                           [1¥19AG Jo %
                                   9104 Wes Aq sunoH                                                                                                                                                                  WI Aq yse] Aq oss
