Committees | Metro Skip to main content collapse all Events News and stories Tools and data Contact Language hub Metro logo, to the homepage Open menu Close menu What Metro does show menu hide menu What Metro does Projects Connecting regional priorities Garbage and recycling system Housing and homelessness Land use and development Parks and nature investments Transportation Tools and data Get involved show menu hide menu Get involved Give your input Committees Find funding Public engagement Waste disposal and prevention show menu hide menu Waste disposal and prevention Need to get rid of something? Healthy living and waste reduction Report dumped garbage Education resources Parks and cemeteries show menu hide menu Parks and cemeteries Parks Boat ramps Cemeteries Reservations and services Safety and policies About Metro show menu hide menu About Metro Metro Council Metro Auditor MERC Structure and operations Civil rights at Metro Accessibility at Metro Equity at Metro Doing business with Metro Public records Jobs Events News and stories Tools and data Contact Language hub Search Search Open search Close search Search Search Committees Metro convenes a variety of advisory, technical and community-focused committees to guide regional planning, policy, funding and oversight. Each brings diverse perspectives to help shape decisions for the Portland metropolitan region. Search Submit Filters Filter results Initiatives Economy (2) Environment (0) Equity (3) Garbage and recycling (1) Housing and homelessness (3) Land and transportation (6) Parks and nature (2) Visitor venues (1) Zoo (1) Apply filters 1 - 12 of 19 results found Affordable Housing Bond Oversight Committee The Affordable Housing Bond Oversight Committee is made up of volunteers who provide independent and transparent oversight of the housing bond. Housing and homelessness Metro Investment Advisory Board The Investment Advisory Board advises Metro on investment strategies, banking relationships, the legality and probity of investment activities and the establishment of written procedures for the investment operations. Economy Supportive Housing Services Oversight Committee The Supportive Housing Services Oversight Committee is made up of volunteers who provide independent and transparent oversight of the SHS fund. Housing and homelessness Audit committee The committee assists the Metro Council in reviewing accounting policies and reporting practices as they relate to Metro’s annual comprehensive financial report. Economy Committee on Disability Inclusion The Committee on Disability Inclusion helps Metro apply an intersectional accessibility lens to its work. Equity Committee on Racial Equity The Committee on Racial Equity brings together a diverse group of advocates to advise Metro Council on how to advance racial equity across the agency’s work. Equity Joint Policy Advisory Committee on Transportation The Joint Policy Advisory Committee on Transportation makes recommendations to the Metro Council on transportation needs in the region. Land and transportation Metro Policy Advisory Committee Established by the Metro Charter in 1992, MPAC advises the Metro Council on the amendment or adoption of the Regional Framework Plan. Land and transportation Metro Technical Advisory Committee MTAC is a 35-member committee of planners, citizens and business representatives that provides detailed technical support to the Metro Policy Advisory Committee. Land and transportation Metropolitan Exposition Recreation Commission The Metropolitan Exposition Recreation Commission works to protect the public investment in three of Metro's visitor venues: Oregon Convention Center, Portland Expo Center and Portland’5 Centers for the Arts. Visitor venues Oregon Zoo Bond Oversight Committee The Oregon Zoo Bond Oversight Committee is appointed by Metro Council to ensure public accountability for expenditures and implementation related to the 2024 Zoo Bond. Zoo Public Engagement Review Committee PERC serves as a key component of Metro’s efforts to develop successful public engagement processes. Equity Pagination Current page 1 Last page 2 Next Opportunities Give your input Jobs Grants and funding Contracts Services Ask a garbage and recycling expert Apply for a contractor's business license Buy a parks pass Buy a cemetery plot Pay my SHS tax Find information for Metro employees Get language assistance Get ADA assistance Leadership Metro Council Who is my councilor? Metro Auditor MERC Committees Metro logo, to the home page Whether your roots in the region run generations deep or you moved to Oregon last week, you have your own reasons for loving this place — and Metro wants to keep it that way. Help shape the future of the greater Portland region and discover tools, services and places that make life better today. Contact Metro 503-797-1700 Relay service 711 Send a message Oregon Convention Center Oregon Zoo Portland Expo Center Portland'5 Centers for the Arts Find Metro on Facebook X LinkedIn Instagram YouTube Blue Sky © Oregon Metro. All rights reserved.