Metrics & Scoring Committee
Equity Impact Assessment



May 2021




                       Hea ] th
                              Authority
         a
ed
                    Vypil                               SK




                                               ji
                                        4%
                                                        SN




                                                     we
                                                        ~
              LE




 EX@CUTIVE SUIMMALY
                  uu.                               cecececceceeceeeeeceeeeesseseeaueaueeeeseeseeeeenseseseseseauansenseeeeeeeeeeseteseesssessecenanseesseeseesteesenssO
 BACKSIOUNC.......csccceseeenseseceeceeeeeeeeseeeeeseeseeaneaeseeeseeseeeeesseceseeeseecenaesaeseeeseeeeeeseteeessssssssssansesssesseeeneesenes O
AIMS ANd MeCthOdS.......cccceeeceeeeceeeceeecceeeceeeeceeeceeeeeeeceuceseeecueceeeeecueeaeeeeaeeesaeeeaeeseaeesesesseeeseesseasesenseees
                                                                                                                                      LD

 HOW MEASUSES AL FLAME                                  2... ..cecceecceccecccecceccaecceeceucceucceccuecaeecueeeeeeseuensneaeeceeseneseesanesentasesesseeeseeees LO

 HOW MEASUSES ALE CNOSEN .....ccscceecceccecccecceccaeccueceuccauceueceeasecueceusenecauenseeasecessaussaesaueseneanenassesssaeess
                                                                                                                                QQ

Outcomes for pr lori ty groups
Convergence of qualitative and quantitative fINGINGS...............::::::sseceeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeceseeseeeseessseeeeses
                                                                                                                  OL
Whatt’S NOXC?                      ...ccccccccceeecceeeceeceeeeeceeceeeeecueceeeeeceeeceeeeeeeeceaeeseeeueseeeeeaeeeaeeeaueesaeesaeesseseseeeseeseseesseesseeesens   GOL

Appendix A - BIDNOS ra PKny..........ccccccceseesceeceeceeseeeseeeeeeeseesuaesseeeeeeseeauaesseeeeeeseeauaesseeeeeesssaaaseeeeeeesssaas 43

Append ix B                       Full Quanti tative          F
                                                                  ind ings                                                                                            A6
                            Ps,
th,




        Eran
         io ares
         ae
         Loe Pots
tears




                                   G
                                   Gt
                                        SOG                         SF Vad




Health disparities mean the same thing as health inequalities. They reflect differences in the
presence of disease, health outcomes, or access to health care between population groups.
For example, male babies are generally born at a heavier birth weight than female babies.
This is a health disparity and we expect to see this difference in birth weight because it is
rooted in genetics and an unavoidable difference.




Oregon will have established a health system that creates health equity when all people can
reach their full health potential and well-being and are not disadvantaged by their race,
ethnicity, language, disability, age, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, social class,
intersections among these communities or identities, or other socially determined
circumstances.

Achieving health equity requires the ongoing collaboration of all regions and sectors of the
state, including tribal governments to address:

        The equitable distribution or redistribution of resources and power; and
        Recognizing, reconciling and rectifying historical and contemporary injustices.



Health inequities are differences in health that are not only unnecessary and avoidable but,
in addition, are considered unfair and unjust. Health inequities are rooted in social injustices
that make some population groups more vulnerable to poor health than other groups. For
example, babies born to Black women are more likely to die in their first year of life than
babies born to White women. A higher percentage of Black mothers are poor and face
hardships associated with poverty that can affect their health. Research has shown links
between the stress from racism experienced by Black women and negative health outcomes.
This is a health inequity because the difference between the populations is unfair, avoidable
and rooted in social injustice.



The term ‘observed disparity’ is used throughout this report to describe the pre-post
differences on measures’ impacts on different population groups. This is important because
not all disparities constitute inequities and we did not directly measure inequities in this
assessment and may not be able to draw such causal inferences.
Refers to the following population groups: Black, Indigenous, People of Color (Asian, Pacific
Islander and Latino/Latina/Latinx) and American Indian/Alaska Native people; people with
low-income; people with disabilities; people who identify as LGBTQ+; people who live in rural
areas.



As used in this report, Social Justice is synonymous with Distributive Justice. This concept is
based on John Rawls A Theory of Justice and emphasizes that the root causes of inequities
can be addressed by transforming social structures and power. In the context of health care,
Potts and Brown (2005) suggest that transforming the way health care resources and
relationships are produced and distributed would improve access to health care services and
health.
    Executive Summary
This report describes findings from an Equity Impact Assessment (EIA) of the Metrics &
Scoring Committee’s work in selecting measures for the coordinated care organization (CCO)
Quality Incentive Program. The Oregon Health Authority (OHA) has set the ambitious and
necessary goal of eradicating health inequities by 2030. The CCO Quality Incentive Program
(also known as the quality pool) is a pay-for-performance program in which CCOs can earn
incentive funds for improving quality for Oregon Health Plan members. As one of the
strongest levers available for improving care and health for members of the Oregon Health
Plan, it is imperative that equity principles are followed in selecting and implementing the
measures included in the program, and that we monitor and assess whether inclusion in the
incentive program reduces health inequities.

The EIA analyzed CCO incentive measures considering OHA’s health equity definition, our
strategic goal to eliminate health inequities by 2030, and questions from the Metrics &
Scoring Committee about how to leverage the incentive program to achieve health equity.
The EIA objective is to identify opportunities to use the incentive program and measures to
address inequities in access to and outcomes of health care in the state’s delivery system.

The EIA used a mixed methods design to concurrently analyze qualitative and quantitative
data. A mixed method design was chosen to optimize the strengths of each method for
evaluating the equity impacts of the incentive metrics. There is growing use of mixed
methods in health services research. This design is justified because inequities exist at
multiple levels and have multiple causal pathways and systems that create and reinforce
inequities. The qualitative component of the EIA was designed to understand the context,
content, and implementation (approval process) of CCO incentive measures. The quantitative
component was designed to provide insights on the effects of individual incentive measures
on priority population groups.1 Case studies of four measures were conducted:

¢   Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS) Access to Care
    (incentivized 2012 - 2019)

¢   Dental sealants on permanent molars for children (incentivized 2015 - 2019)

«   Disparity measure: Emergency Department utilization for members with mental illness
    (incentivized 2018 - present)

¢   Effective contraceptive use (incentivized 2015 - 2019)

While the findings related to the individual case study measures are important, the purpose of
this assessment is to identify opportunities to use the incentive program and measures to
address inequities in access to and outcomes of health care. Multiple factors, including data
availability, impacted the measures which could be included as case studies in this
assessment. The analysis focused on process, specifically, so that processes overall could be
improved. This means recognizing the findings related to these four specific measures, and

1 Priority groups are populations with evidence suggesting that the origins of their disparities are unjust social
structures and manifest in increased exposures to health risks that result in poor health outcome.


5 | Executive Summary
focusing on how the learnings from these case studies can be used to improve Committee
processes so the incentive program can be best leveraged to recognize, reconcile, and rectify
historical and contemporary injustices.

What did we find? Convergence of qualitative and quantitative findings is summarized in the
table below.

                                        Qualitative                                Quantitative
                         Does the framing       Does the measure | Did most priority      Did observed
 Incentive Measure       consider               selection process | populations           disparities decrease
                         differential           integrate Health    achieve increased | for most priority
                         impacts on priority | Equity principles? | benefits?             population groups?
                         populations?
 Effective               No                     No
 Contraceptive Use
 ED Utilization for      No                     No
 Mental Illness
 Dental Sealants for
 Children
 CAHPS Access to         No                     No                     No                    No
 Care - Adults
 CAHPS Access to         No                     No                     No                    No
 Care - Children


As shown above, findings were mixed in terms of whether integrating health equity principles
into the measure selection process led to improvements for priority populations and
decreased observed disparities. This may be due to several factors, including lack of a formal
and consistent process for including equity principles in measure selection, and the
disparate ways in which CCOs may choose to implement their quality improvement efforts in
support of achieving the incentive measures.

    e   While the incentive program      is powerful in terms of focusing quality improvement
        activities in a particular area, it currently operates within the boundaries of what can
        be quantified and consistently measured. This can have negative consequences on
        health equity and therefore caution must be used to ensure the Quality Incentive
        Program is the best lever for improvement.

    e   There is a need to ensure the populations most impacted by current and potential
        incentive measures are meaningfully engaged in what is incentivized and how
        measures are operationalized. This includes identification of what is considered a
        problem needing to be solved, and how it should be solved. We must include anti-
        colonial, anti-racist, indigenous knowledge to identify what the problems are and
        what the roots of the problems are.




2 The rate of use of moderately and highly effective contraceptives increased for most priority populations.   However, we
do not know if this was entirely beneficial because the metric may have incentivized contraceptive coercion. See the
“How measures were framed” section for further explanation.

6 | Executive Summary
    e      The quantitative analysis showed the need to monitor and analyze incentive
           measures by Race, Ethnicity, Language, and Disability (REALD), as looking at
           aggregated data on incentive measures statewide can mask inequities in outcomes
           within and between for priority populations.


    e      Only two of the case study measures    reduced   inequities for most priority population
           groups, suggesting that quality improvement activities may not be implemented
           using equity principles.

    e      For most of the case study measures the quantitative analysis found lower level of
           inequities between   race and ethnicity groups, patients with or without disabilities,
           and members living in rural or urban areas. However, the magnitude of inequities
           across different household   language groups are large for most measures,      indicating
           meaningful access to health care with appropriate language services remains a key
           area to be addressed.


While the findings identify a lack of focus on equity and health equity principles, they are not
surprising given the entrenchment of power structures like racism that perpetuate and rely
upon continued marginalization of priority populations and communities. Moreover, as a
state and agency, our priorities have shifted to where they should have been all along. The
adoption and development of these case study measures was done prior the Oregon              Health
Policy Board and OHA’s adoption of a common definition of health equity in 2019, and OHA
setting its strategic goal of eliminating health inequities by 2030. The health equity definition
provides a clear framework for achieving this goal and is the foundation by which we move
forward.

The EIA is the necessary first step to ensure the Quality Incentive Program advances health
equity. The findings of this report, coupled with the foundation of the health equity definition,
provide a path by which the Committee can check its assumptions moving forward, and
ensure that health equity principles are included in measure selection and retirement and
that the incentive program can be leveraged to meet the goal of eliminating health inequities
by 2030. To ensure meaningful change, the following changes are recommended:

    e      Include formal consideration of equity in measure selection and retirement criteria.
           Update measure selection and retirement criteria to formally integrate health equity
           principles as criterion. This could also include setting a threshold proportion of
           number of measures in the program that must directly advance health equity,
           designating a ‘must meet’ criterion for individual measures related to health equity,
           and/or establishing a formal review process for each measure (and the set) to check
           assumptions about a measure’s impact (or lack thereof) on health equity.

    e      Program structure changes. Explore changes to the program structure to focus on
           priority populations. As the program is currently structured, setting targets across the
           entire membership can mask inequitable outcomes. This includes prioritizing
           measures that address the social determinants of health and equity which can be at
           the root of unjust health outcomes.

    e      Use of diverse knowledge and expertise. Increase input from Medicaid members and
           priority populations who will be impacted   by how the measures are framed, which


7 | Executive Summary
       measures are selected, and how they are implemented, evaluated, and retired. This
       could include a paid Medicaid    member consultation panel or inclusion of Medicaid
       members as members of the M&SC, for example. In addition, qualitative evaluation
       of member experience can be considered and integrated into the benchmark setting
       and measure     retirement processes.

   e   Education about inequities and using consistent language to address the identified
       problem. Disparities and inequities were used interchangeably in the conversations
       in which equity was discussed (for example, the emergency department utilization for
       mental illness measure). It was not clear whether the focus was on addressing
       disparities (differences in health outcomes that may be rooted in genetics) or
       inequities (differences in health outcomes that are unfair, avoidable and rooted in
       social injustice).   A shared understanding is needed across M&SC    members, as well
       as staff. This might include anti-racism and other health equity trainings.

   e   Consider implementation. Once a measure is incentivized, emphasize opportunities
       for both OHA and CCOs to include implementation efforts rooted in health equity
       principles and focus on efforts which will reduce inequitable outcomes.

   e   Additional ideas. In addition to the ideas above, it is important for the Committee and
       staff to do the work to identify additional solutions and process changes to address
       historical and contemporary injustices and move forward. The authors of the
       assessment look forward to a dialogue and ongoing work with the Committee and
       staff to move this work forward together.




8 | Executive Summary
                                                                 HEALTH EQUITY DEFINITION
Adoption of Health Equity
                                                         Oregon will have established a health system
Definition                                               that creates health equity when all people can
   The Health Equity Committee, a subcommittee           reach their full health potential and well-being
   of the Oregon Health Policy Board (OHPB)              and are not disadvantaged by their race,
   tasked with coordinating and developing policy        ethnicity, language, disability, age, gender,
   that proactively promotes the elimination of
                                                         gender identity, sexual orientation, social class,
   health disparities and the achievement of
                                                         intersections among these communities or
   health equity for all people in Oregon, worked
                                                         identities, or other socially determined
   closely with the Oregon Health Authority’s (OHA)
                                                         circumstances.
   Equity and Inclusion Division staff to develop
   the health equity definition in the box to the        Achieving health equity requires the ongoing
   right. The development process included               collaboration of all regions and sectors of the
   feedback from various groups including the            state, including tribal governments to address:
   tribes, community-based organizations, OHPB
   committees, coordinated care organizations                e   The equitable distribution or
   (CCOs), and community advisory councils.                      redistribution of resources and power;
                                                                 and
   In October 2019 the definition was formally
                                                             e   Recognizing, reconciling and rectifying
   adopted by both the OHPB and OHA asa
                                                                 historical and contemporary injustices.
   shared definition for use agency-wide and the
   driving force behind OHA’s strategic goal to
   eliminate health inequities by 2030. The
   health equity definition and principles enshrined in the definition provide a framework for
   program and policy evaluation across the agency.

CCO Quality Incentive Program
   The CCO Quality Incentive Program (also known as the quality pool) is a pay-for-
   performance program in which CCOs can earn incentive funds for improving quality of
   care for Oregon Health Plan members.

   The program has been in existence since 2013 and is an important lever for quality
   improvement included in Oregon’s Medicaid       Demonstration Waiver agreement with the
   Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.

   CCOs receive financial bonuses paid for year-over-year improvement on the healthcare
   quality measures   included in program. In total, thirty (30) quality measures   have been
   included in the program since its inception. The number of measures included in each
   year varies, ranging from 13 in 2020 to 19 in 2019. Payments for the total quality pool
   have ranged from $47 million for 2013 performance to $188 million for 2018
   performance.

   The Metrics and Scoring Committee (M&SC) was established         in 2012   by Senate Bill
   1580 for the purpose of identifying the specific measures included in the CCO Quality
   Incentive Program, as well as the targets and benchmarks that must be met to earn the
   bonus funds. Per statute, M&SC includes nine members: three members representing


9 | Background
     CCOs; three healthcare quality measurement experts; and, three members-at-large. The
     M&SC annually reviews and updates the measures and targets included in the program.
     The CCO Quality Incentive Program is one of OHA’s strongest levers in terms of
     measuring performance and paying for improved care and outcomes for members of the
     Oregon Health Plan. Independent evaluation of the 2012-17 Medicaid Demonstration
     Waiver found a strong association between the incentive program and improvements               in
     CCO measure performance.? Improvement was significantly greater on measures
     included in the incentive program versus those tracked by OHA but not incentivized. The
     relative improvement of incentivized versus non-incentivized measures was such that the
     evaluators recommended          that:

           e   The size of the quality pool be
               ,                 a                            “The State should increase the portion of CCO
               increased (additional fees at risk);
                                                              payments awarded for performance on quality
           e   The benchmarks/standards for                   measures and increase the level of performance
               meeting measures be increased;                 needed to receive the full award. To raise the
               and,                                           bar, the State could increase the benchmarks
                                                              and improvement targets for existing quality
           e   New measures be added to the                   measures, introduce new quality measures, or
               program.                                       both. The State should use the larger quality
       ;                                                      pool and higher performance standards to drive
Equity Impact Assessment                                      improvement in areas with relatively little
     Given the power of the incentive program                 progress— such as access to primary care and
     to catalyze and accelerate quality                       integration of physical, behavioral, and oral
     improvement, the specific measures                       health care—by raising standards or introducing
     included in the program are very                         new measures in these areas.”3
     important. It is also imperative that equity
     principles are adhered to in selecting the
     measures for this focused quality
     improvement work, and that we monitor and assess whether inclusion in the incentive
     program       results in reduced disparities and increased equity. This analysis is a first step
     forward to realizing these goals and improving M&SC processes to ensure the work of the
     Committee and the incentive program can be best leveraged to further health equity.




3Evaluation of Oregon's 2012-2017 Medicaid Waiver, OHSU Center for Health Systems Effectiveness, Dec. 2017:
https://www.oregon.gov/oha/HPA/ANALYTICS/Evaluation%20docs/Summative%20Medicaid%20Waiver%20Evaluation
%20-%20Final%20Report.pdf.

10   | Background
Aims and Methods
     The purpose of this Equity Impact Assessment (EIA) is to analyze CCO incentive measures
     considering OHA’s health equity definition and questions from the M&SC about how to
     leverage the incentive program to achieve health equity. The objective of the EIA is to
     identify opportunities to use the incentive program and measures to address inequities in
     access to and outcomes of health care in the state’s delivery system.

Methods
     To evaluate the incentive measures from multiple perspectives, this research used a
     concurrent mixed methods design. With this design, qualitative and quantitative data are
     analyzed independently, then the results are triangulated and interpreted together. The
     strengths of a concurrent mixed method design include using multiple data sources
     (qualitative and quantitative) to identify patterns, themes, associations, and relationships
     that expand our understanding of the incentive program and identify opportunities for
     leveraging the program to achieve the agency’s health equity goals (Creswell & Pablo-
     Clark, 2011).

     The qualitative component comprises case studies of four measures chosen by a
     purposive sampling of current and previously incentivized measures. The measures are:

         e   Effective contraceptive use (incentivized 2015 - 2019). Percentage of women
             (ages 15-50) with evidence of one of the most effective or moderately effective
             contraceptive methods during the measurement year: IUD, implant, contraceptive
             injection, contraceptive pills, sterilization, patch, ring, or diaphragm.

         e   Disparity measure: Emergency Department utilization for adult members with
             mental illness (incentivized 2018 - present). Rate of patient visits to emergency
             department for members ages 18+ with mental illness. Rates are reported per
             1000 member months; lower is better, indicating greater care coordination.

         e   Dental sealants on permanent molars for children (incentivized 2015 - 2019).
             Percentage of children ages 6-14 who have sealants on permanent molars.

         e   Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS) Survey
             Access to Care (incentivized 2012 - 2019). Percentage of members responding
             to survey who thought they received appointments and care when they needed
             them.

     The maximum     variation approach to purposive sampling was used for selecting
     measures from the broad spectrum available in the incentive program, and to ensure
     that our results provide deeper understanding of the incentive program (Etikan,
     Abubakar, & Alkassim, 2016). Elements of the sampling strategy included the availability
     of adequate sample size of individual member-level data through claims,
     hybrid/attestation, or survey for conducting both the qualitative and quantitative
     analysis; population groups by age cohort (children, adolescents, and adults); care types
     (physical, behavioral, oral); and, length of time in the incentive program.




12   | Aims and Methods
Qualitative Research Strategy
     The qualitative component of this research seeks to understand:

         e     How are the chosen    incentive measures framed? How are populations most
               affected by inequities differentially affected by this framing?

         e     How does the measure selection process integrate health equity principles?
               Where are opportunities to align this process with these principles?

     This analysis combined case study method with the Intersectionality Based Policy
     Analysis (IBPA) framework. Case study method was selected because the metrics are
     bounded    phenomena     studied in their real world contexts using multiple data sources
     (Yin, 2014). A strength of case study is that it allows for the tracing of events through
     time, so is an ideal strategy for researching a process such as the measure selection
     process (ibid).

     IBPA provided a framework to evaluate the incentive measures through an intersectional
     lens and to describe the broader equity implications of the measures (Hankivsky et al.,
     2014). IBPA was selected because it aligns with principles of OHA’s health equity
     definition including the distribution of power and resources, using diverse knowledges,
     valuing different social locations, and promoting social justice (ibid).

     Data collected for analysis included:

         e     Measure guidance documents

         e     M&SC meeting minutes and meeting recordings

         e     CCO metrics Technical Advisory Group (TAG) minutes and meeting recordings

         e     Other related documents used to create, maintain, or retire the measure

         e     Background literature related to the specific issue addressed by the measure

         e     Key informant interviews

     Two analysts selected, reviewed, and coded all documents. The analysts developed a
     coding structure using directed content analysis as described       by Hsieh and Shannon
     (2005). Directed content analysis was selected because of our focus on the “content or
     contextual meaning” of the texts through an intersectional lens (ibid, p. 1283).

     To ensure validity of the findings, the analysts kept a chain of evidence documenting
     analysis decisions so that others could trace their steps (Yin, 2014). Triangulation among
     multiple data sources was used to ensure our findings fit a larger pattern (Yin, 2014).
     Throughout the research process the analysts reflected on their social positions
     (positionality) and strove to understand how their world views shape the project. The
     purpose of ongoing positionality is to make the researchers’ bias explicit and understand
     how their bias affects analysis decisions, thereby improving the rigor of the study
     (Bourke, 1990).




13   | Aims and Methods
Quantitative Research Strategy
     The quantitative component of this research is designed
     to provide insights on the effects of individual incentive          AVERAGE PERCENTAGE
     measures on priority populations:                                   DISTANCE TO THE MEAN
             How did improvements on incentive measures              The percentage distance to the mean
             compare    by race, ethnicity, language, and            (PDTM) method calculates the
             disability across the measures in the Quality           percentage distance for the measure
             Incentive Program?                                      result of a given demographic group
                                                                     to the statewide average performance
     To systematically observe pre- and post-measure
                                                                     of the measure.
     movements by demographic factors such as
     race/ethnicity groups, the analysis included:                   For example, in 2014 the Dental
                                                                     Sealant rate for female members was
             Defining and comparing performance on each
                                                                     12.6%, which is 5.4% higher than the
             measure before and after it became incentivized.
                                                                     statewide average at 12.0%; at that
             Difference in difference within measures       by       time the sealant rate for male
             race/ethnicity groups:                                  members was 11.4%, which is 4.9%
                                                                     lower than the statewide average.
                 .@)   Examining if all or most race and ethnicity   Regardless of higher or lower, the
                       groups show improvement - counts and          average PDTM between the two
                       percentage of racial and ethnic groups        groups Is 5.1%.
                       seeing improvement.
                                                                     In 2019 the statewide average for the
                       Measuring the spread (observed                Dental Sealant measure reached
                       disparities) using an average percentage      26.9%. In reviewing by binary gender,
                       distance to the mean (PDTM) calculation
                                                                     the rate for female members was
                       among different racial and ethnic groups.     27.8% which is 3.4% higher than the
                       Lower average PDTM     means   lower levels
                                                                     statewide average, while the rate for
                       of observed disparities and if the average    male members was 26.0%, 3.2%
                       PDTM   is decreased from the baseline year
                                                                     lower than average. The average
                       to the post-incentive year, we consider the
                                                                     PDTM of the two groups became
                       spread is reduced.
                                                                     3.3%, which is a 1.7-point reduction
     e   Additional intersectional analyses by household             from the average PDTM in 2014.
         language, gender, disability, and rural versus urban        Therefore, we consider ‘the spread’
         comparisons as data allowed.                                (observed disparity) between female
                                                                     and male for this measure reduced.
         Table 1 provides an overview of quantitative analyses
         by measure:




14   | Aims and Methods
Table 1. Quantitative Analysis by Measure
                                                                    “Pre” Year                 “Post” Year
     Measure                             Years Incentivized         (baseline before           (comparison year
                                                                    incentivized)              once incentivized)
                                                                    2014                       2019
     Effective contraceptive use                                     REALD* R/E                REALD R/ E
     (ages 15-50)                        2015-19                     Disability                Disability
                                                                     Language                  Language
                                                                     Rural/urban               Rural/urban
                                                                    2017                       2019
     Disparity measure: emergency                                    REALD R/E                 REALD R/E
     department utilization for adult | 2018+                        Gender                    Gender
     members with mental illness                                     Disability                Disability
                                                                     Language                  Language
                                                                     Rural/urban               Rural/urban
                                                                    2014                       2019
                                                                    REALD R/E                  REALD R/E
     Dental sealants                     2015-19                    Gender                     Gender
                                                                     Disability                Disability
                                                                     Rural/urban               Rural/urban
     CAHPS access to care                                           2014                       2019
     composite; separate analyses        2013-19                    CAHPS R/E                  CAHPS R/E
     for Adult and Child®                                            Gender®                   Gender
                                                                     Health Status             Health Status

It should also be noted that the term ‘observed disparity’ is used throughout this report to
describe the pre-post differences on measures’ impacts on different population groups. This
is important because not all disparities constitute inequities and we did not directly
measure inequities in this assessment and may not be able to draw such causal inferences.

Demographic Data Source
For the CAHPS Access to Care measure, demographic information (race/ethnicity, gender,
and health status) is based on members’ responses to the survey. For the rest of the claims-
based measures, individual-level gender, disability, household language, and rural/urban
indicators are based on their records in the Medicaid Management Information
System/Decision Support/Surveillance and Utilization Review System data warehouse
(MMIS/DSSURS) at the time of the measurement year production. Members’ disability status
in MMIS/DSSURS         is based on their Medicaid eligibility category.

While we recognize the importance of disaggregating data to identify and address inequities
that exist within and across all REALD categories, due to data constraints and scope of this
assessment, we were unable to conduct full subgroup analysis, especially for members with
disabilities. The disability analysis was therefore limited to data from members’ Oregon

* REALD Repository pilot data base, compliant with REALD (race, ethnicity, language, and disability) data standards
© Because of the way the CAHPS survey is administered, quantitative results for adults and children are presented
separately.
6 Stratification by gender only available for adult comparison

15   | Aims and Methods
Health Plan eligibility which includes a field indicating only their disability. Cognizant of the
systemic data quality issues, OHA is creating a REALD Repository dataset which will leverage
existing data systems and imputation methods to achieve full REALD compliance including
all disability categories. We hope to utilize the completed        REALD   Repository dataset for
future research projects.

Furthermore, given the large proportion of missing/unknown             race/ethnicity in
MMIS/DSSURS in recent years, we utilized OHA’s REALD Repository pilot dataset for the
race/ethnicity breakout analyses for the claims-based measures. The REALD Repository pilot
dataset links each member’s race/ethnicity information collected in the ONE enrollment
system with other historically reported race/ethnicity records from past interactions with
Oregon Health Plan or other state agencies (data linked by Integrated Client Service, ICS data
warehouse), as well as data collected by Medicare and other health plans that report to the
Oregon All Payer All Claims (APAC) database. A single race category is assigned for each
person using the following method (based on the Most Identify/Rarest Group methodology
[Mays et al, 2003)):

         e   Data from the ONE enrollment system            is prioritized. Members with reported
             race/ethnicity in ONE are assigned the self-identified primary race/ethnicity, or
             the rarest race/ethnicity if a primary race/ethnicity is not identified.

         e   People with no reported race/ethnicity in ONE are assigned the rarest
             race/ethnicity from ICS and APAC data sources.

         e   The rarest Race/Ethnicity group is selected based on the order below:

                           Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander
                0




                           Middle Eastern or North African
                0000000




                           Black or African American
                           American Indian or Alaskan Native
                           Asian
                           Hispanic/Latino
                           White
                           Other

     As an example, for members             in the Emergency Department Utilization for Adult Members
     with Mental Illness measure in measurement year 2019, the race/ethnicity information
     is missing/unknown based on the MMIS/DSSURS data for 32% of the members in the
     denominator;         using the REALD    Repository pilot dataset we are able to determine a race
     category for 99% of the members.

Overall Research Strategy
     While the findings related to the individual case study measures are important, the
     purpose of this assessment is to identify opportunities to use the incentive program and
     measures to address inequities in access to and outcomes of health care. Multiple
     factors, including data availability, impacted the measures which could be included as
     case studies in this assessment. The analysis focused on process, specifically, so that
     processes overall could be improved. This means recognizing the findings related to
     these four specific measures, and focusing on how the learnings from these case studies



16   | Aims and Methods
      can be used to improve Committee processes so the incentive program can be best
      leveraged to recognize, reconcile, and rectify historical and contemporary injustices.

      As noted earlier, the overall research strategy involves a mixed methods approach     in
      which findings from the qualitative and quantitative components are analyzed
      concurrently to formulate answers to the research questions. This utilizes the strengths
      of both approaches and is summarized     in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Overall research strategy



         Qualitative Data
     Collection and Analysis   —
          (Case Studies)




                                               Compare and relate                    Interpretation of
                                    —__——>       qualitative and       —.>            qualitative and
                                              quantitative analyses                quantitative results

        Quantitative Data
     Collection and Analysis   __
          (Demographic
          Stratification)




17    | Aims and Methods
Findings
How measures are framed
Framing refers to how social issues are constructed and the conceptual lenses through
which we see the world (Russell, Greenhalgh, Byrne,      & McDonnell, 2008). Analyzing how the
measures were framed provides insight into the assumptions behind each measure and
gives context for evaluating the equity impacts of the framing (Hankivsky et al., 2014). In this
section, we consider how certain issues were defined as problems, and how incentive
metrics were crafted to address these problems.

The results in tables 2-5 below focus on whether the framing of each measure aligned with
health equity principles and the goal to eliminate inequities faced by priority populations. We
focused on these population groups because of historical and contemporary evidence that
the origins of the inequities are due to unjust social structures and manifest in increased
exposures to health risks including racism, bigotry and bias that result in poor health
outcomes. Where applicable, we point out how the framing of measures differentially
affected specific priority population groups and communities.

Effective contraceptive use
In July 2014, M&SC discussed the idea for a measure in the category of
“contraception/unintended      pregnancy” and adopted the Effective Contraceptive Use (ECU)
measure in August 2014. The ECU measure addressed the issue of unintended pregnancy
through incentivizing the prescription of specific contraceptive methods. Unintended
pregnancy has been a public health focus for decades, however research suggests that
pregnancy planning may be an imposed framework based in culturally-specific fertility-timing
norms rather than a framework that is relevant to all people (Aiken, Borrero, Callegari, &
Dehlendorf, 2016; Neiterman & LeBlanc, 2018; Wise, Geronimus, & Smock, 2017).

The ECU measure incentivized healthcare providers to prescribe specific contraceptive
methods. These methods included the top two of the three tiers of contraceptives outlined by
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention:’ female sterilization, intrauterine devices,
diaphragms, implants, pills, patches, vaginal rings, and injections. The top two tiers are the
subset of methods considered      ‘effective’ that could be tracked via medical claims.

By only counting the top two tiers of contraceptive methods, the ECU measure excluded tier
three methods: fertility awareness, withdrawal, and condoms. Although tier three methods
are less effective at the population level and require user skill, they are effective at
preventing pregnancy and may be a person’s preferred method for a variety of reasons. For
example, the level of control the user has and whether the method contains hormones or
interferes with sexual pleasure are considerations that may shape individual preferences for
contraception (Fox et al., 2018; Higgins & Smith, 2016).

The ECU Guidance Document instructed healthcare providers to respect individual
contraceptive preferences. However, by linking the bonus payment to specific methods,
healthcare providers may have pressured patients to choose one of the incentivized methods
to secure funding for their clinics.   Research has described multiple forms of contraceptive
coercion by healthcare providers, such as pressuring a patient to use a specific method or


7 See https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/unintendedpregnancy/pdf/contraceptive        methods   508.pdf


19   | How measures are framed
refusing to remove contraceptive implants (Amico, Bennett, Karasz, & Gold, 2016; Gomez &
Wapman, 2017). At the August 2016 M&SC meeting, concern was raised about incentivizing
contraceptive coercion. M&SC considered changing the framing of the metric, but did not
directly address concern about contraceptive coercion, and the metric was not changed.

In 2017, M&SC voted to expand the age range of women counted for the denominator to
include 15-17-year-olds (previously the metric was limited to women aged 18+). This
prompted concern from CCOs and healthcare providers about targeting low-income women
and women of color for fertility control. The metric was retired in 2019 based on concerns
that the metric didn’t address sexually transmitted disease, that the denominator included
women not at risk for unintended pregnancy, and concerns about inequities.

Table 2. Framing of the effective contraceptive use measure

     Framing of the measure                               Equity impacts of this framing
     e      Unintended pregnancies are a cause of         e   Ignores the systemic roots of poverty and poor health
            poverty and poor health                       e   |gnores that Tier 3 contraceptives are also effective
     e     Counts only Tier 1 and 2 contraceptives as         methods and may be preferred
           effective methods                              e   The measure does not incentivize access but rather
     e     Improves access to contraception                   incentivizes the use of specific contraceptive
     e     Contraception is the responsibility of women       methods. This may incentivize contraceptive
                                                              coercion, which is problematic in light of historical
                                                              reproductive oppression that targeted similar
                                                              populations.
                                                          e   Ignores that conception requires a male and female
                                                              component.


Disparity measure: Emergency Department utilization for adult members with mental illness
Conversations about a health equity focused measure began at the M&SC and CCO Metrics
TAG in August of 2014 and a measure representing health equity was selected for inclusion
in the incentive menu set in 2018. A number of equity and/or disparity focused          measures
and approaches were explored and considered by M&SC and the TAG. The measure that was
adopted focused on members with severe, persistent mental illness (SPMI) using an
expansive definition of SPMI that had been agreed on by OHA and the Department of
Justice,? which includes other related conditions such as major depression and anxiety. The
name of the final measure excluded the SPMI language for clarity. People with mental illness
have disparate physical health outcomes (e.g., people with mental illness die on average 25
years younger than people without mental illness). Therefore, the goal of the “disparities
measure” was to address disparities in physical health outcomes, which can be related to
stigma and lack of care coordination for members with mental illness. These inequalities
were reflected in growing disparities in Emergency Department utilization for members with
mental illness. Incentivizing the measure was expected to improve care coordination and
integration generally, which would be indicated by decreases in Emergency Department
utilization. Although at the time this was thought to be an equity metric, when viewed through




8 https://www.oregon.gov/oha/hsd/bhp/Pages/USDOJ-Agreement.aspx


20       | How measures are framed
the lens of the adopted health equity definition, it is not in fact an equity measure,            but rather
an observed disparity measure.

Table 3. Framing of the disparities in Emergency Department utilization for members with mental
illness measure

    Framing of the measure                                   Equity impacts of this framing
   e    To address a gap in the incentive menu set.          |e   The measure calculation excludes members who may
   e     Incentivizing mental illness related ED                  be receiving culturally specific care for their mental
        utilization would help to improve care                    illness. This group may not be formally diagnosed
        coordination and integration for physical and             and therefore excluded from the denominator.
        mental health care and reduce ED utilization              Disparities in the availability of culturally specific
        for all groups including priority populations.            mental health providers and services
                                                                  disproportionately affect access and care
                                                                  coordination for priority populations.


Dental sealants on permanent molars for children
The dental sealants measure was crafted to hold CCOs and the dental community
accountable for preventive dental care services, which were newly covered by Oregon
Medicaid. In February 2014, the Dental Quality Metrics Workgroup presented two potential
dental metrics for M&SC consideration: “sealants on permanent molars for children” and “any
dental service.” The dental sealants metric was based on Dental Quality Alliance and CMS
metrics. The benchmark was set based on EPSDT? data and Healthy People 2020 goals.
There was debate over including all children in the denominator or only children at a higher
caries risk level,    a debate which was echoed       in the literature (Kumar et al., 2018). In July
2019, this measure was retired because a new measure, Kindergarten Readiness:
Preventative Dental Services, was adopted. This new measure accounts for a range of
children’s preventive dental services instead of only focusing on sealants.


Table 4. Framing of the dental sealants on permanent molars for children measure

    Framing of the measure                                   Equity impacts of this framing
   e    Children on Medicaid have higher rates of            e    The measure included all children in the denominator,
        cavities compared with children not on                    regardless of caries risk level (Kumar et al., 2018).
        Medicaid.                                                 This could mean that children who didn’t need
   e    Dental sealants are a way to prevent cavities.            sealants got them anyway, a topic which was
   e    Low-income children have lower dental                     discussed by M&SC and considered in setting the
        sealant rates than higher income children.                benchmark.
                                                             e    Communities who have limited English proficiency
                                                                  and low parental functional health literacy may face
                                                                  unique barriers to sealant use (Mejia et al., 2011)




2 Early and   Periodic Screening,   Diagnostic, and Treatment data from   Medicaid


21 | How measures are framed
CAHPS access to care measure
The Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS) survey is
considered a standardized and reliable instrument for measuring perception of the
healthcare delivery system and care experience of adult and child populations. Oregon        has
used CAHPS since 1998 for quality improvement and for federal reporting requirements. The
Access to Care composite of the survey was included in the incentive menu set from 2013 to
2019. To identify gaps and opportunities for improving culturally appropriate care, the survey
was modified in 2014 to include supplemental questions about cultural competency, health
literacy, and interpretive services.

Table 5. Framing of the CAHPS access to care measure

   Framing of the measure                       Equity impacts of this framing
   e   Astandardized instrument for             e   Accessibility of the survey to diverse audience. CAHPS is available
       measuring consumers and patients’            only in English and Spanish which affects priority populations, some
       health care experiences from multiple        of whom may be more comfortable providing feedback in other
       perspectives and evaluating their            languages.
       perceptions of access to services,                © The comparatively lower response rate of minority patients
       timeliness of services, the quality of                to CAHPS surveys contribute to a potential bias in estimates
       services received, and the                            of their health care experience. Their voice and perspectives
       communication skills of providers.                    may be underrepresented in how survey responses are
                                                             utilized for quality improvement in health care.
                                                e   While the oversampling method in CAHPS is designed to increase
                                                    the size and weight of the health care experience of priority
                                                    communities, the comparatively smaller sample sizes of such groups
                                                    in the oversampling results suggest that this method is less effective
                                                    in capturing feedback from diverse groups and communities.




22 | How measures are framed
How                  measures                             are chosen
The selection process provided insights on the context and adoption of the incentive
measures and information for evaluating whether equity principles were considered and
integrated into the problem identification phase of each measure. We evaluated the
selection process under both OHA and M&SC control, including the measure selection and
retirement checklists, measure endorsement (OHA developed or nationally endorsed),
sources and uses of evidence (evidence based practice and practice based evidence), public
testimony, and the intersectional effects of measures.

The specific equity principles we considered include the historical equity impacts of the ideas
each measure is based on, including racism and racial and cultural differences in the
evidence base for each measure, whether the implementation of measures resulted in
differential impacts on priority populations, the distribution of resources and power, and
established    relationships to improve health outcomes for priority populations.

Tables 6-9 provide summary       results on whether equity principles were considered and
integrated into the selection process for each measure, and whether the following equity-
related principles and concepts were addressed in the selection process: the role of power
and use of diverse knowledge; time and space; and social justice.

Effective contraceptive use
Equity principles were partially considered during the selection process but not fully
integrated into the measure approval or specifications. The role of power and potential
coercion was considered and discussed, especially regarding whether to include 15-17-year-
olds in the measure,     but the health equity related concerns were not addressed.



Table 6. Effective contraceptive use measure selection process
Did the measure selection process...
     Recognize and address role
                                         Recognize and address the            Recognize the role of social
     of power and use diverse
     knowledge?                          role of time and space?              justice?

     No.                                 No.                                  No.
     The voice of Medicaid members,    | There was evidence available         The process was based on
     especially women from priority      when the metric was created that   | increasing the use of specific
     communities who may be most         described historical and recent      contraceptives, but did not control
     impacted, was not included or       reproductive coercion targeting      for the potential for coercion
     considered.                         priority populations (Roberts,       (Senderowicz, 2019).
     The diverse cultural knowledge    | 2017). However, this evidence        For example, there is peer reviewed
     about which methods of              was not effectively utilized to      evidence documenting healthcare
     contraception are considered        inform the development of the        provider refusal to remove
     "effective” was not integrated      metric.                              contraceptive devices when patients
     into the process.                                                        requested them removed (Amico,
                                                                              Bennett, Karasz, & Gold, 2017).



23   | How measures are chosen
     Recognize and address role
                                          Recognize and address the               Recognize the role of social
     of power and use diverse
     knowledge?                           role of time and space?                 justice?

     The power relationship between                                               Contraceptive coercion erodes trust
     healthcare providers and                                                     in the relationship between patients
     patients and the effects of the                                              and providers.
     measure on this relationship,
     such as eroding trust, was
     ignored.


Disparity measure: Emergency Department utilization for adult members with mental illness
Equity principles were considered in the process but not integrated into the final measure. The
decision to include this measure was based on a need for addressing health equity, and
various analyses of Emergency Department (ED) utilization patterns and stigma associated
with ED utilization for mental health conditions was undertaken. However, the analysis did not
consider the differential or intersectional effects of stigma and ED utilization by priority
populations. Evidence suggests that mental illness is under-diagnosed for some Communities
of Color and Tribal Communities, in part because of their preference for culturally specific
mental health services and the shortage of a diverse mental health care workforce. Some
population groups would therefore not be captured in the denominator of the measure
(Kressler, Demler, Frank et al, 2003; Cook, McGuire, and Miranda 2000; McGuire and
Miranda, 2008).

Table 7. Disparities in Emergency Department utilization for members with mental illness measure selection
Did the measure selection process...
     Recognize and address role of                 Recognize and address                      .
                    .                                           ,                    Recognize the role of
     power and use diverse                         the role of time and                  stg:
                                                                                     social justice?
     knowledge?                                    space?
     No.                                           Partially.                        No.
     Testimony from impacted communities         | The focus of the measure         The measure was not targeted
     was not included in the measure               changed several times to align | at allocating resources to
     selection process. However, CCOs and          with evolving national           improve upstream mental
     provider views were actively sought,          evidence suggesting the need | health care for priority
     considered, and integrated into the           and benefits from improving      populations, despite existing
     selection process.                            care coordination and            evidence about disparities and
     Diverse knowledge including the               integration for individuals       inequities in access to mental
     expertise of health equity researchers or     experiencing mental illness.      health care for priority
     organizations such as Substance Abuse | Butitisunclearwhetherthe             | populations.*°
     and Mental Health Services                    changes improved upstream      | The measure assumed
     Administration (SAMHSA) were not           mental health services and           incorrectly that "a rising tide
     sought or integrated to help address the | Outcomes for priority                will lift all boats" and that
     design and measurement concerns            populations. For example,            focusing on care coordination

10 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (2014) National healthcare quality and disparities report. Rockville (MD):
(AHRQ Publication No. 15-0007) (http://www.ahrq .gov/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/
research/findings/nhqrdr/nhqdr14/ 2014nhqdr.pdf).


24   | How measures are chosen
     Recognize and address role of               Recognize and address
                                                                                   Recognize the role of
     power and use diverse                       the role of time and
                                                                                   social justice?
     knowledge?                                  space?
     identified during the selection process.    while the quantitative results    and integration for physical
     For example, issues associated with         of the EIA suggested that most    and mental health care in the
     seeking culturally specific mental health   priority populations achieved     total denominator population
     services and their effects on potentially   increased benefits, disparities   would improve mental health
     undercounting denominator visits were       remained.                         care and consequentially
     not addressed.                                                                reduce ED utilization by priority
     Evidence about provider bias and                                              populations. This was contrary
     discrimination in diagnosing the severity                                     to existing evidence suggesting
     of mental health conditions for priority                                      that “universal approaches to
     patient populations create inequities                                         care are ineffective” but
     and should be addressed as part of the                                        “tailoring the provision of care”
     measure design and selection process                                          removes barriers and improves
     (Balsa, McGuire, & Meredith, 2005).                                           access and outcomes of
                                                                                   mental health care for priority
                                                                                   communities (Algeria et a/,
                                                                                   2016).
                                                                                   For example, there was
                                                                                   evidence suggesting that the
                                                                                   lack of access including
                                                                                   language, cultural and
                                                                                   geographic barriers to mental
                                                                                   health services for priority
                                                                                   populations was problematic
                                                                                   (Westen, Novotny, &
                                                                                   Thompson, 2004; Eden ef a/,
                                                                                   2012) but, the design and
                                                                                   specifications of the measure
                                                                                   were not adjusted to address
                                                                                   these known inequities.


Dental sealants on permanent molars for children
Equity principles were included in the framing of the problem. It was recognized that children
of lower Socio-Economic Status (SES) are more likely to have dental caries and historically
have not had access to preventive care. It was also recognized that children from higher
income households were more likely to have sealants compared with children from lower SES
households.




25   | How measures are chosen
Table 8. Dental sealants on permanent molars for children measure selection
Did the measure selection process...
     Recognize and address
                                       Recognize and address the              Recognize the role of social
     role of power and use
                                       role of time and space?                justice?
     diverse knowledge?
     Partially.                        Yes.                                   Yes.
     Knowledge from impacted           The origin of the metric recognized    The process recognized that
     communities was not included      that preventive dental care was not    children of low SES are less likely
     in the selection process.         historically covered by Medicaid.      to have sealants than children of
     The American Dental               The process recognized that            high SES and this may contribute
     Association and American          preventive dental care may not be a    to health issues later in life.
     Academy for Pediatric Dentistry   part of people’s culture and gave      The guidance for the metric
     recommend sealants to protect     suggestions to partner with            implementation included
     molars from developing caries.    culturally specific community          alternative care delivery ideas to
     The selection process             groups for outreach.                   reach more children, like bringing
     recognized that dental care may   Systemic issues in the healthcare      dental sealants to schools, using
     not be a priority for families    system that impede patient access      mobile sealant clinics, and
     experiencing social/economic      to dental care are noted in the        incorporating dentists into primary
     issues, but that preventing       guidance document.                     care clinics.
     caries could have a big impact    Patient-centered outreach              The guidance document
     ona   child's future health and   strategies are included.               recognized barriers to access built
     well-being.                                                              into the system and gave
                                                                              suggestions for changing the
                                                                              system to make it more
                                                                              accessible. A limitation of this
                                                                              work is that we don't know if these
                                                                              strategies were used by CCOs to
                                                                              improve access to dental sealants.


CAHPS access to care measure
Equity principles were considered and integrated in the survey development process with a
focus on capturing and measuring the healthcare experience of patients. The development of
the survey instrument integrated diverse healthcare consumer perspectives. The inclusion of
cultural competency, health literacy and interpreter services suites in the 2014 version of the
survey was intended to align the measure with health equity. The survey is generally available
in English and Spanish languages, but more can be done to improve accessibility
Table 9. CAHPS access to care measure selection
Did the measure selection process...
     Recognize and address
                                       Recognize and address the             Recognize the role of social
     role of power and use
                                       role of time and space?               justice?
     diverse knowledge?
     No.                               Partially yes.                        No.
     The oversampling method is        The flexibility to add additional     The language accessibility and
     designed in theoryto capture      survey suites in 2014 and the         methodological issues with over

26    | How measures are chosen
     Recognize and address
                                          Recognize and address the            Recognize the role of social
     role of power and use
                                          role of time and space?              justice?
     diverse knowledge?
     the health care experience of        process that led to including the    sampling impact data quality and
     diverse care recipients, but         additional suites, suggest           quality improvement in the health
     there continue to be concerns        adaptation to new evidence -         care experiences of priority
     about whether the over-              capturing the cultural differences   populations.
     sampling approach fully              in the health care experiences of    The availability of the survey in
     captures the diverse voices and      different racial and ethnic          other languages apart from English
     measures the experiences of          population groups.                   and Spanish can improve response
     priority populations. The            However, it is not clear whether     rates, accuracy in measuring
     evidence of continuing decline       results are actionable in terms of   patient health care experience, and
     in the response rate of the          how measuring differences in         using the data to address
     survey supports this concern         experience translates into           disparities and inequities (Grob et
     (Evans ef a/, 2020).                 eliminating disparities and          al, 2009).
     There continue to be reliability     inequities (Davies et a/, 2008;      Patient voice is a marker of health-
     and validity concerns with           Quigley ef a/ 2019).                 care quality and validation of the
     responses from different racial                                           effectiveness of the health-care
     and ethnic groups which appear                                            system (Donabedian, 1966).
     to be related to the accessibility
     of the survey. For example, the
     responses and results from the
     Spanish version are less reliable
     compared with the English
     version (Lurie et a/ 2003).




27   | How measures are chosen
Outcomes for priority groups
How did improvements on incentive measures compare by race, ethnicity, language, and disability
across the measures in the Quality Incentive Program?


Effective contraceptive use (ECU) - comparisons are 2014 to 2019
   e   Statewide the measure showed a 17.5 percentage point increase in utilization of
       higher tier contraceptive methods for women age 15-50 from 2014 to 2019 (32.3%
       to 49.7%).

   e   By race and ethnicity, all groups saw increases in ECU. The overall spread between
       groups also decreased   by 0.7%, suggesting the observed disparity has reduced
       slightly. White members saw the largest increase of 19.3 percentage points; Asian
       members saw the smallest increase of 12.2 percentage points.

   e   All household language groups saw increases in the ECU measure. English-speaking
       members saw the largest ECU change (+17 percentage points), followed by the
       Vietnamese-speaking population (+15 percentage points). Russian-speaking
       members saw the smallest increase, (+8 percentage points). The spread between
       groups decreased by 2.4%, suggesting the observed disparity by household language
       has decreased.

   e   Members with or without disabilities all saw increases for ECU and the observed
       disparity was greatly reduced. In the baseline year (2014) the ECU rate for members
       with disabilities was 22.3%, significantly lower than members without disabilities
       (33.2%). By 2019 the ECU rates for both groups came close to 50%, less than a 2
       percentage point difference between the two groups.

   e   Although both rural and urban groups saw increases in ECU, the observed disparity
       grew larger. In 2014, the difference between the two groups was less than one
       percentage point (rural 32.5%, urban 32.1%). Rural populations saw a larger
       increase and by 2019, the difference grew to 6 percentage points (rural 53%, urban
       47.4%).




28 | Outcomes for priority groups
Effective contraceptive use, 2014 and2019
                                             20%                   40%               60%            80%        100%

                                                         33.7%       46.7%
             Haw/Pac Islander                              o——®e
                                                    27.7%        42.8%
              Mid E/N. African                        o———®
                                                          34.7%       47.5%
       Black/African American                               —_—e
                                                          35.2%           52.6%
         Am Indian / Al. Native                             o——_®
                                                    27.8%      40.0%
                                                                                           Change in spread:
                          Asian                       o——e
                                                       31.4%         47.1%                      -0.7%
               Hispanic/Latino                           o——_e
                                                        32.4%            51.6%
                          White                           o——®
                                                   26.5%          43.4%
                           Other                     o——®
                                     14.4%         26.3%
                      Unknown          oe


                                                           34.0%           51.2%
                         English                             o———_®
                                              23.1%          36.1%
                       Spanish                  oe
                                      16.4%
                        Russian     o—e
                                        18.2% 33.6%                                 Change in spread:
                   Vietnamese             o-——®
                                     20.3%           31.1%
                                                                                            -2.4%
            Chinese languages              oe
                                      24.3%        34.7%
                           Other            o—e
                                             29.0%       45.7%
       Unknown/ Undetermined                   oe


                                             22.3%                       48.5%
                  Disability yes               ®                  e                        Change in spread:
                                                           33.2% 49.8%
                                                                                               -15.7%
                   Disability no                             o—®


                                                        32.5%               53.0%
                 Frontier/ Rural                           o—_®                            Change in spread:
                                                       32.1% 47.7%
                                                                                                +4.7%
                          Urban                          o——_e




29 | Outcomes for priority groups
Disparities in Emergency Department (ED) utilization for members with mental illness -
comparisons are 2017 to 2019 (lower is better on this measure)
     e   Statewide the rate of ED utilization among members with mental illness went down
         6% from 2017 to 2019.

     e   By binary gender, both male and female members with mental illness saw ED use
         reductions, and the utilization rates for both groups also got closer to the mean.

     e   By race and ethnicity, almost all groups saw ED reductions except for other and
         unknown. The overall spread   between groups also decreased     by 2%, suggesting the
         observed disparity by race and ethnicity has decreased.

     e   By members’ household language, only half of major language groups (3 out of 6)
         saw ED use reductions. While ED utilization by Chinese-speaking members with
         mental illness reduced by more than half, ED utilization by Russian-speaking
         members with mental illness saw a large increase. The spread between groups
         increased   by 2%, suggesting the observed disparity by household   language grew
         larger.

     e   Members with or without disabilities all had reductions in ED use. However, the
         observed disparity grew larger as members without disabilities saw a larger
         improvement.

     e   The observed disparity in ED utilization between rural and urban members with
         mental illness was already small in 2017; both groups saw reductions in rates and
         the difference between the two groups remains negligible.

     e   Given this measure only looks at adult members with a history of mental illness, it is
         important to investigate whether there were underlying biases in terms of members
         receiving mental health care in the first place, and therefore being included in the
         measure denominator:

             o   In 2019, in the CCO-statewide population, 32% of adults had a history of
                 mental illness. American Indian/Alaskan Native had the highest rate of
                 having mental illness history at 39%, followed by Whites at 34%. Asian
                 American adults had the lowest rate of mental illness history at 18%, followed
                 by Hispanic/Latino at 23%.

             o   By language categories in 2019, 33% of English-speaking adults had mental
                 illness history. Chinese-speaking adults had the lowest proportion of mental
                 illness history at 7%, followed by Russian-speaking adults at 8%, and Spanish
                 and Vietnamese-speaking adults both at 13%.




30   | Outcomes for priority groups
Emergency department utilization for members with mental
illness, 2017 and 2019
Rates are shown per 1,000 member months. A lower rate is better
                                                            for this measure.


                                     0                                                            100                                      150
                                                           50

                                                                                          100.6             108.1
                           Female               Changein spread:                         96.1         oe

                                                          -1.8%                                  eo
                              Male


                                                                                                           109.2        125
               Haw/ Pac   Islander                                                                          eo—)
                                                                                  87.2     91.8
                Mid E/N. African                                                         eo
                                                                                                                      126         132
         Black/African American
                                                                                                                    1249           134.1
           Am Indian / Al. Native                                                                                       eo
                                          Changein spread:                     75.6       86.3
                             Asian                 re)                         eo—
                                              -1.8%                                           96.8          104
                 Hispanic/Latino                                                                 e-0
                                                                                              97.5 102.7
                             White                                                                eo
                                                                     73.7         73.9
                             Other                                           @
                                            25.9   33.4
                          Unknown              0-0

                                                                                              100.2          106.7
                           English                                                                    eo
                                                                        76.1             79
                          Spanish                                                @)
                                                                57  66.9
                           Russian                               —6
                                              _ eo. 9                                            Change in spread:
                     Vietnamese
                                                31.5                     71.1                               +2.1%
              Chinese languages                                           )
                                                                        77.5          77.7
                             Other                                             e@
                                                                 65.5        71.9
        Unknown/ Undetermined                                           e-

                                                                                                                     129.2        132.2
                    Disability yes              Change in spread:                                                             e
                                                          9%                              91.6        98
                     Disability no
                                                       2.1%
                                                     +2.7


                                                                                              98.7           104.8
                   Frontier/ Rural                     Change in spread:                          e-0
                                                                                                 99 105.4
                            Urban                               0%                                 eo



31   | Outcomes for priority groups
Dental sealants on permanent molars for children - comparisons are 2014 to 2019
        Statewide the measure showed a 14.9 percentage point increase for children ages 6-
         14 receiving at least one dental sealant, from 2014 to 2019 (12.0% to 26.9%).

         By binary gender, both male and female members had improvements of about 15
         percentage points, and the difference remains small (rate for female members       is
        slightly higher).

         By race and ethnicity, all groups saw improvements    in dental sealants. The overall
        spread between groups also decreased by 12.5%, suggesting the observed disparity
        was notably reduced. Hispanic/Latino members saw the largest improvement of 17.3
        percentage points; Black/African American saw the smallest improvement of 9.9
         percentage points.

        All household language groups saw improvements. Spanish-speaking members saw
        the largest improvement (+19.3 percentage points), followed by Other (15.5
         percentage points), and English-speaking members (+14.6 points). Russian-speaking
         members saw the smallest improvement of 6.9 percentage points. The spread
         between groups decreased by 16.7%, suggesting the observed disparity by
         household language was largely reduced.

         Children with or without disabilities all saw improvement for getting dental sealants,
         and the observed disparity reduced slightly. In the baseline year (2014) the dental
        sealant rate for children with disabilities was 8%, lower than children without
         disabilities at 12.1%. Even though children without disabilities saw greater
         improvement by 2019, children with disabilities also got closer to the statewide
         average.

         Both rural and urban populations saw significant improvements in the sealants
         measure and the observed disparity greatly reduced (27.9% reduction in the spread).
         In 2014, the dental sealant rate for the rural population was 7.9%, about half of that
        for the urban population at 14.6%. By 2019, the rates for both groups saw large
         improvements and came close to 27%.




32   | Outcomes for priority groups
Dental sealants on permanent molars for children, 2014 and
2019
                                                   20%                      40%            60%         80%   100%

                                        12.6%               27.8%
                          Female                                             Change in spread:
                                       11.4% 26.0%
                                                                                   -1.7%
                             Male        o-——e

                                      10.0%           24.4%
              Haw/ Pac   Islander
                                                   21.3%          32.6%
                Mid E/N. African
                                           13.7%      23.6%
         Black/African American
                                       11.9%               27.1%
          Am Indian / Al. Native
                                            15.5%            29.1%
                                                                                   Change in spread:
                            Asian
                                           13.7%              31.0%                    -12.5%
                Hispanic/Latino
                                      10.3%           24.4%
                            White
                                        12.9%         23.9%
                            Other           oe
                                     9.1%  26.6%
                         Unknown      o———_®

                                      10.5%              25.1%
                          English
                                            15.2%                   34.5%
                         Spanish            o——_®
                                       15.4%  22.3%
                          Russian
                                              16.0%         28.3%
                                                                                  Change in spread:
                    Vietnamese
                                                    21.6%           34.1%             -16.7%
             Chinese languages
                                              16.0%              31.5%
                            Other
                                        12.8% 28.2%
        Unknown/ Undetermined             o-——®

                                    8.0%        18.6%
                   Disability yes                                                 Change in spread:
                                       12.1% 27.1%
                    Disability no        o———®                                         -1.1%

                                    7.9%                   26.8%
                  Frontier/ Rural                                           Change in spread:
                                            14.6% 26.9%
                           Urban              o——e                                -27.9%



33   | Outcomes for priority groups
CAHPS: Access to Care - Children
         Note: Because of the way the CAHPS survey is administered, quantitative results for
         adults and children are presented separately. While children’s CAHPS survey data by
         binary gender is available for more recent years, it is not available for the baseline
         comparison year, SO comparisons are not made     in this report.

            Statewide the measure saw an improvement of 2 percentage points from 2014
            to 2019. The improvement was slightly larger for accessing routine care (CAHPS
             Question 6) compared to urgent needs (Question 4, needed care right away).

             Five of the race and ethnicity groups saw improvement in the Access to Care
            composite and the observed disparity decreased (the spread      reduced   by 2.6%).
             However, CAHPS does contain small sample sizes for several race and ethnicity
            groups. Of groups with larger sample sizes: White and Hispanic/Latino members
            saw improvements in both accessing urgent and routine care; Asian members
            saw a large improvement in accessing routine care.

            Access to care worsened for children with fair or poor health status, particularly
            for accessing routine care (declined by 10 percentage points). The disparity
            between children of different health statuses increased.




34   | Outcomes for priority groups
CAHPS: Access to Care - Children, 201.4 and 2019
                                     0%   20%          40%         60%         80%                      100%



                                                                               87.7%             89.5%
          Am Indian / Al. Native                                                          @)

                                                                  60.2%    78.0%
                            Asian                                     o——_-®

                                                                           80.5%            87.6%
         Black/African American                                                 o—e

                                                                 58.5%                    90.0%
             Haw/ Pac. Islander                                   e                         @

                                          Change in spread:                83.0%          86.0%
                 Hispanic/Latino               -2 6%                                 ee

                                                                                      89.5%         94.6%
                            White                                                           e-e
                                                                            83.0%           88.2%
                             Other                                                   o-®e

                                                                                  89.7% _ 90.0%
                             Multi                                                      @




                  Health status                                                87-0             87.7%

                 very 00d/good                       Change in spread:
                                                          +5.1%           79.7%        85.5%
          Health status fair/ poor                                             eo—*




35   | Outcomes for priority groups
CAHPS: Access to Care - Adults
         e       Statewide the measure saw a small improvement of 1 percentage point from
                  2014 to 2019. The improvement was slightly larger for accessing routine care
                  (CAHPS Q6) compared to urgent care (Q4 needed care right away).

         e       Access to care improved for both male and female members, and the observed
                 disparity between the two groups remained negligible.

         e        Half of the racial and ethnic groups saw improvement in Access to Care
                 composite and the observed disparity grew larger (the spread increased by 4%).
                 However, CAHPS does contain small sample sizes for several racial and ethnic
                 groups. White saw improvements in both accessing urgent and routine care.
                  Hispanic/Latino saw a large decrease in accessing routine care.

         e       Access to care worsened for members with good/very good self-reported health
                 status but maintained the same for members with fair/poor health status.


CAHPS: Access to Care - Adults,                                           and 2019
                                           0%         20%           40%         60%                       80%                      100%


                                                                                               81.0%                   82.7%

                                 Female                        Change in spread:                                  ad
                                                                          0%                    81.5%                      82.7%
                                   Male                                                                           @


                                                                                      65.0%                            86.9%
             Am Indian / Al. Native                                                                                        ®
                                                                                        67.5%  81.5%
                                   Asian                                                  e—_—_

                                                                                       70.5%              76.9%
         Black/African American                                                                 —o
                Haw       / Pac. Island         Change in spread:          "e                 12.5%
                      aw / Pac. Islander
                                                     +4,.0%
                                                                                              76.6%               79.5%
                        Hispanic/Latino                                                               e
                                                                                                 82.5%                     84.7%
                                  White                                                                                e
                                                                                                78.5%                  85.4%
                                   Other                                                                      —e@

                                                                                              78.4% _ 78.5%
                                   Multi                                                                  e



                          Health status                                                        80.9% e'
                        very good/good                          Change in spread:
                                                                      +1.2%                   80.5%           e
                                                                                                                  80.5%
             Health status fair/ poor


36   | Outcomes for priority groups
Convergence of qualitative and
quantitative findings
What do we find when quantitative and qualitative findings are combined?
Table 10 integrates the qualitative and quantitative results to evaluate the following
hypothesis statement:

     e   If the selection process for a measure integrated health equity principles and
         considered the differential impacts of the framing on priority populations, then most
         priority populations would realize increased   benefits and reductions in observed
         disparities.

Note that the questions in the convergence table were rephrased to be more direct and
focused on priority populations who are most impacted by inequities.
     e   Qualitative columns.
             o   Framing. Results summary is based on evaluating the equity impacts of the
                 framing and populations affected by framing. A designation of ‘yes’ means
                 the framing not only considered, but integrated issues faced by priority
                 populations and did not exclude such groups from benefiting. A designation
                 of ‘no’ means the framing negatively impacted priority populations and
                 excluded some groups from benefiting.
             o   Integration of health equity principles into measure selection. A designation
                 of ‘yes’ indicates that the results of at least two-thirds of the questions about
                 equity principles were evaluated as a ‘yes’ by reviewers.
     e   Quantitative columns. The quantitative section of the table focuses on three
         categories: race and ethnicity; language; and, disability. A designation of ‘yes’ means
         that at least two of the three categories show improvements and decreases in
         observed disparities.




37   | Convergence of qualitative and quantitative findings
Table 10. Convergence of qualitative and quantitative results
                                            Qualitative                                   Quantitative
                          Does the framing          Does the measure      Did most priority       Did observed
 Incentive Measure        consider differential | selection process       populations achieve | disparities
                          impacts on priority     integrate Health        increased benefits? | decrease for most
                          populations?            Equity principles?                              priority population
                                                                                                  groups?
 Effective                No                      No
 Contraceptive Use
 ED Utilization for       No                      No
 Mental Illness
 Dental Sealants for
 Children
 CAHPS Access to          No                      No                      No                      No
 Care - Adults
 CAHPS Access to          No                      No                      No                      No
 Care - Children


As illustrated in Table 10, findings were mixed in terms of whether integrating health equity
principles into the measure selection process led to improvements for priority populations and
decreased observed disparities. This may be due to several factors, including lack of a formal
and consistent process for including equity principles in measure selection, and the disparate
ways in which CCOs may choose to implement their quality improvement efforts in support of
achieving the incentive measures. Health equity principles may be absent when a measure is
selected, but CCOs may utilize these principles in their implementation plans; the reverse may
also be true, in which equity principles are included in measure selection, but not in how CCOs
implement their quality improvement efforts.

Integration of the qualitative and quantitative findings also highlighted the following:

     e   While the incentive program     is powerful in terms of focusing quality improvement
         activities in a particular area, it currently operates within the boundaries of what can
         be quantified and consistently measured. This can have negative consequences. For
         example, the ECU measure was limited to numerator credit for contraceptives that
         can be captured in claims, meaning other effective measures that might be more
         culturally appropriate for some priority populations would not be counted, and could
         result in coercion to use contraceptive methods discordant with one’s preference or
         culture. Another example, again using ECU, is that men’s role in unintended
         pregnancies could not be addressed due to data capture limitations, which
         perpetuates patriarchal conceptions of women’s responsibilities for contraception.


     e   The measures    included in the case studies here included consultation with providers,
         CCOs, and those working in healthcare, but a dearth of consultation with priority


11 The rate of use of moderately and highly effective contraceptives increased for most priority populations. However,
we do not know if this was entirely beneficial because the metric may have incentivized contraceptive coercion. See the
“How measures were framed” section for further explanation.

38   | Convergence of qualitative and quantitative findings
         populations and members     most impacted    by the incentive measures. There is a need
         to ensure the populations most impacted by potential incentive measures have a say
         in what is incentivized and how measures are operationalized. This includes
         identification of what is considered a problem needing to be solved, and how it
         should be solved. We must include anti-colonial, anti-racist, indigenous knowledge to
         identify what the problems are and what the roots of the problems are.

     e   The quantitative analysis showed the need to monitor and analyze incentive
         measures by Race, Ethnicity, Language, and Disability (REALD), as looking at
         incentive measures statewide can mask inequities in outcomes for priority
         populations.


     e   Overall, three of the four case study measures saw improvements for most of the
         priority population subgroups. However, this could be due to very poor performance
         at baseline across all population subgroups (which might have been a reason the
         measure was selected for the incentive program in the first place). Only two of the
         case study measures reduced observed disparities for most priority population
         groups, suggesting that quality improvement activities may not be implemented
         using equity principles.

     e   For most of the case study measures the quantitative analysis found lower level of
         observed disparities between   race and ethnicity groups, patients with or without
         disabilities, and members living in rural or urban areas. However, the magnitude of
         observed disparities across different household    language groups are large for most
         measures, indicating meaningful access to health care with appropriate language
         services remains a key area to be addressed.

While the findings identify a lack of focus on equity and utilization of health equity principles,
they are not surprising given the entrenchment of power structures such as racism that
perpetuate and rely upon continued marginalization of priority populations and communities.
Moreover, as a state and agency, our priorities have shifted to where they should have been
all along. The adoption and development of these case study measures was done prior the
Oregon Health Policy Board and OHA’s adoption of a common definition of health equity in
2019, and OHA setting its strategic goal of eliminating health inequities by 2030. The health
equity definition provides a clear framework for achieving this goal, and is the foundation by
which we move forward.




39   | Convergence of qualitative and quantitative findings
What’s Next
Opportunities to align process with health equity principles
The EIA is the necessary first step to ensure the Quality Incentive Program advances health
equity. The findings of this report, coupled with the foundation of the health equity definition,
provide a path by which the Committee can check its assumptions moving forward, ensure
that health equity principles are included in measure selection and retirement, and that the
incentive program can be leveraged to meet the goal of eliminating health inequities by
2030. To ensure meaningful change, the following changes are recommended:

        Include formal consideration of equity in measure selection and retirement criteria.
        Update measure selection and retirement criteria to formally integrate health equity
        principles as criterion. This could also include setting a threshold proportion of
        number of measures in the program that must directly advance health equity,
        designating a ‘must meet’ criterion for individual measures related to health equity,
        and/or establishing a formal review process for each measure (and the set) to check
        assumptions about a measure’s impact (or lack thereof) on health equity.

        Program structure changes. Explore changes to the program structure to focus on
        priority populations. As the program is currently structured, setting targets across the
        entire membership can mask inequitable outcomes. This includes prioritizing
        measures that address the social determinants of health and equity which can be at
        the root of unjust health outcomes.

        Use of diverse knowledge and expertise. Increase input from Medicaid members and
        priority populations who will be impacted by how the measures are framed, which
        measures are selected, and how they are implemented, evaluated, and retired. This
        could include a paid Medicaid   member consultation panel or inclusion of Medicaid
        members as members of the M&SC, for example. In addition, qualitative evaluation
        of member experience can be considered and integrated into the benchmark setting
        and measure    retirement processes.

        Education about inequities, and using consistent language to address the identified
        problem. Disparities and inequities were used interchangeably in the conversations
        in which equity was discussed (for example, the emergency department utilization for
        mental illness measure). It was not clear whether the focus was on addressing
        disparities (differences in health outcomes that may be rooted in genetics) or
        inequities (differences in health outcomes that are unfair, avoidable and rooted in
        social injustice).

        Consider implementation. Once a measure is incentivized, emphasize opportunities
        for both OHA and CCOs to include implementation efforts rooted in health equity
        principles and focus on efforts which will reduce inequitable outcomes.

        Additional ideas. In addition to the ideas above, it is important for the Committee and
        staff to do the work to identify additional solutions and process changes to address
        historical and contemporary injustices, and move forward. The authors of the



41 | What’s Next?
       assessment look forward to a dialogue and ongoing work with the Committee and
       staff to move this work forward together.




42 | What’s Next?
Appendix A - Bibliography
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (2014) National healthcare quality and disparities report.
Rockville (MD): (AHRQ Publication No. 15-0007) (http://www.ahrq .gov/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/
research/findings/nhqrdr/nhqdr14/ 201 4nhqdr.pdf).

Aiken, A. R. A., Borrero, S., Callegari, L. S.,   & Dehlendorf, C. (2016). Rethinking the pregnancy planning
paradigm: Unintended conceptions or unrepresentative concepts? Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive
Health, 48(3), 147-151. https://doi.org/10.1363/48e10316.

Amico, J. R., Bennett, A. H., Karasz, A., & Gold, M. (2017). “I wish they could hold on a little longer”:
physicians’ experiences with requests for early IUD removal. Contraception, 96(2), 106-110.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.contraception.2017.05.007.

Balsa Al, McGuire TG, Meredith LS. Testing for Statistical Discrimination in Health Care. Health
Services Research. 2005; 40(1):227-252

Evans, R; Berman, S; Burlingame, E; Fishkin, S (2020) It’s Time To Take Patient Experience Measurement
And Reporting To A New Level: Next Steps For Modernizing And Democratizing National Patient
Surveys, Health Affairs Blog(https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.13
                                                 7 //hblog20200309.359946/full).

Brown, S. S., & Eisenberg, L. (1995). The Best Intentions: Unintended pregnancy and the well-being of
children and families. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US). httos://doi.org/10.17226/4903.

Collins, P. H. (2019). Intersectionality as Critical Social Theory. Duke University Press.

Cook BL, McGuire TG, Miranda J. Measuring Trends in Mental Health Care Disparities, 2000-
2004. Psychiatric Services.

Davies E, Shaller D, Edgman-Levitan S, Safran DG, Oftedahl G, Sakowski J, and Cleary P (2008). Evaluating
the Use of a Modified CAHPS Survey to Support Improvements             in Patient-Centered Care: Lessons from a
Quality Improvement Collaborative, Health Expectations, 11(2), 160-176.

Donabedian A. Evaluating the quality of medical care. 1966. Milbank Q. 2005;83(4): 691-729Eden J,
Maslow K, Le M, Blazer D (2012) The mental health and substance use workforce for older adults: in whose
hands? Washington (DC): National Academies Press.

Eden J, Maslow K, Le M, Blazer D (2012) The mental health and substance use workforce for older adults: in
whose hands? Washington (DC): National Academies Press.

Etikan, |; Abubakar Musa, S; Alkassim, R.S(2016). Comparison of Convenience Sampling and Purposive
Sampling. American Journal of Theoretical and Applied Statistics. Vol. 5, No. 1, 2016, pp. 1-4.

Evans, R; Berman, S; Burlingame, E; Fishkin, S (2020) It’s Time To Take Patient Experience Measurement
And Reporting To A New Level: Next Steps For Modernizing And Democratizing National Patient
Surveys, Health Affairs Blog(https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/hblog20200309.359946/full).

Fox, E., Reyna, A., Malcolm,    N. M., Rosmarin,    R. B., Zapata, L. B., Frederiksen, B. N., ... Dehlendorf, C. (2018).
Client Preferences for Contraceptive Counseling: A Systematic Review. American Journal of Preventive
Medicine. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2018.06.006.



43   | Appendix A - Bibliography
Gomez, A. M.,   & Wapman,   M. (2017). Under (implicit) pressure: Young Black and Latina women’s
perceptions of contraceptive care. Contraception, 96(4), 221-226.
httos://doi.org/10.1016/j.contraception.2017.07.007.Grob, R., Schlesinger, M., Barre, L. R., Bardach, N. et
al. (2019). What Words Convey: The Potential for Patient Narratives to Inform Quality Improvement. The
Milbank quarterly, 97(1), 176-227.

Grob, R., Schlesinger, M., Barre, L. R., Bardach, N. et al. (2019). What Words Convey: The Potential for
Patient Narratives to Inform Quality Improvement. The Milbank quarterly, 97(1), 176-227.

Hankivsky, O., Grace, D., Hunting, G., Giesbrecht, M., Fridkin, A., Rudrum, S., ... Clark, N. (2014). An
intersectionality-based policy analysis framework: critical reflections on   a methodology for advancing equity,
1-16.

Harris, L. H., & Wolfe, T. (2014). Stratified reproduction, family planning care and the double edge of history.
Current Opinion in Obstetrics and Gynecology, 26(6), 539-544.

Health Equity Definition, Presentation to OHPB (October 2019)
(https://www.oregon.gov/oha/OEI/HECMeetingDocs/Health®%®20Equity%20Definition              October%202019%20
HEC%20Presentation%20to%200HPB. pdf).

Higgins, J. A., & Smith, N. K. (2016). The sexual acceptability of contraception: Reviewing the literature and
building a new concept. Journal of Sex Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/00224499.2015.1134425,

Hsieh, H. F., & Shannon, S. E. (2005). Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qualitative Health
Research, 15(9), 1277-1288.

Kessler RC, Demler O, Frank RG, et al. Prevalence and treatment of mental disorders, 1990        to 2003. New
England Journal of Medicine. 2005;352:2515-2523.

Kumar, S. V., Bangar, S., Neumann, A., Kookal, K. K., Yansane, A., Tokede, O., ... Walji, M. (2018). Assessing
the validity of existing dental sealant quality measures. Journal of the American Dental Association, 149(9),
156-764.e1. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adaj.2018.05.001.

Lurie N, Zhan C, Sangl J, Bierman AS, Sekscenski     ES (2003). Variation in racial and ethnic differences in
consumer assessments of health care. The American Journal of Managed Care. ;9(7):502-509.

Margarita Alegria et al (2016) Removing Obstacles To Eliminating Racial And Ethnic Disparities In Behavioral
Health Care. Health Affairs 35(6): 991-
999. (https://www. healthaffairs.org/doi/pdf/10.137 //hithaff.2016.0029).

Mays, Vickie & Ponce, Ninez & Washington,     Donna & Cochran, Susan. (2003). Classification of Race and
Ethnicity: Implications for Public Health*. Annual review of public health. 24. 83-110.

Margarita Alegria et al (2016) Removing Obstacles To Eliminating Racial And Ethnic Disparities In Behavioral
Health Care. Health Affairs 35(6): 991-999.
(https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/pdf/10.137 //hithaff.2016.0029).

McGuire, T.G and Miranda,J(2008) Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Mental Health Care: Evidence and Policy
Implications.

Mejia, G. C., Weintraub, J. A., Cheng, N. F., Grossman, W., Pamela, Z., Phipps, K. R., & Gansky, S. A. (2011).
Language and literacy relate to lack of children’s dental sealant use. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol, 39(4),
318-324. https://doi.org/doi:10.1111/j.1600-0528.2010.00599.x.


44 | Appendix A - Bibliography
Neiterman, E., & LeBlanc, Y. (2018). The timing of pregnancy: Women’s        interpretations of planned and
unplanned pregnancy. Qualitative Sociology Review, 14(1), 52-66.

Potts, K.   & Brown, L. (2005). Becoming an anti-oppressive researcher. In L. Brown & S. Strega (Eds.),
Research as resistance: Critical, Indigenous, and anti-oppressive Approaches (pp. 255-268). Toronto:
Canadian Scholars’ Press.

Quigley DD, Elliott MN, Hambarsoomian K, Wilson-Frederick SM, Lehrman WG, Agniel D, Ng JH, Goldstein EH,
Giordano LA, Martino SC (2019). Inpatient care experiences differ by preferred language within racial/ethnic
groups. Health Serv Res. 54 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):263-274.

Rawls, J. (1971). A theory of justice. Boston: Harvard University Press.

Roberts, D. (2017). Killing the Black Body: Race, Reproduction, and the Meaning of Liberty (Second          Edi).
New York: Vintage Books.

Senderowicz, L. (2019). “I was obligated to accept”: A qualitative exploration of contraceptive coercion.
Social Science and Medicine, 239. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.112531.

State of Oregon Equity Framework in COVID-19 Response and Recovery(2020)
(https://www.oregon.gov/gov/policy/Documents/EquityFrameworkCovid19 2020.pdf).

Westen D, Novotny CM, Thompson Brenner H (2004) The empirical status of empirically supported
psychotherapies: assumptions, findings, and reporting in controlled clinical trials. Psychol Bull.
2004;130(4):631-63.

Wise, A., Geronimus, A. T.,   & Smock, P. J. (2017). The best of intentions: A structural analysis of the
association between socioeconomic disadvantage and unintended           pregnancy in a sample of mothers from
the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (1979). Women’s Health Issues, 27(1), 5-13.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.whi.2016.10.006.

Yin, R. K. (2014). Case Study Research: Design and Methods (5th ed.). Sage Publications.




45   | Appendix A - Bibliography
    Appendix B - Full Quantitative Findings
                                                Observed
                                  Most groups | disparity
Measure           Breakout        improved?     reduced?    | Observations
                                      .                      Statewide the measure saw a    large increase in utilization of higher tier contraceptive methods
                               Statewide change                                   .
                                                             of 17.5 percentage points for women age 15-50 from 2014 to 2019 (32.3% to 49.7%).
                                  Yes (8/8                    By race and ethnicity, all groups saw increases in ECU. The overall soread between groups also
                                                             decreased by 0.7%, suggesting the observed disparity has reduced slightly. White members
                  REALD R/E       excluding       Yes                                                               ,                            ,
                                                             saw the largest increase of 19.3 percentage points; Asian members saw the smallest increase
                                  unknown)
                                                             of 12.2 percentage points.
                                                             All household language groups saw increases in the ECU measure. English-speaking members
                                  Yes (6/6                   saw the largest ECU change (+17 percentage points), followed by the Vietnamese-speaking
   Effective      Language        excluding       Yes        population (+15 percentage points). Russian-speaking members saw the smallest increase, of
Contraceptive                     unknown)                   8 percentage points. The spread between groups decreased by 2.4%, suggesting the observed
 Care (ECU)                                                  disparity by household language has decreased.
                                                              Members with or without disabilities all saw increases for ECU and the observed disparity was
                    .    ae                                  greatly reduced. In the baseline year (2014) the ECU rate for members with disabilities was
                  Disability      Ves 2           Yes        22.3%, significantly lower than members without disabilities (33.2%). By 2019 the ECU rates
                                                             for both groups came close to 50%, less than a 2-point difference between the two groups.
                                                             Although both rural and urban groups saw increases in ECU, the observed disparity grew
                                                             larger. In 2014, the difference between the two groups was less than one percentage point
                  Rural/Urban | Yes (2/2)         No         (rural 32.5%, urban 32.1%). Rural populations saw a larger increase and by 2019, the
                                                             difference grew to 6 percentage points (rural 53%, urban 47.4%).




    46    | Appendix B - Full Quantitative Findings
                                                Observed
                                  Most groups | disparity
Measure           Breakout        improved?     reduced?        | Observations
                               Statewide change                  Statewide the measure saw a 6% reduction in ED use from adult members with mental illness,
                                                                 from 2017 to 2019.
                                                                  By gender, both male and female members with mental illness saw ED use reductions, and the
                  Gender          Yes (2/2)       Yes               vgs
                                                                  utilization rates for both groups also got closer to the mean.
                                  Yes (7/8                       By race and ethnicity, almost all groups saw ED reductions except for other and unknown. The
                  REALD R/E       excluding       Yes            overall soread between groups also decreased by 2%, suggesting the observed disparity by
                                  unknown)                       race and ethnicity has decreased.

                                                                  By members’ household language, only half of major language groups (3 out of 6) saw ED use
  Disparity                       No (3/6                         reductions. While ED utilization by Chinese-speaking members with mental illness reduced by
   (MHED)         Language        excluding       No              more than half, ED utilization by Russian-speaking members with mental illness saw a large
                                  unknown)                        increase. The spread between groups increased by 2%, suggesting the observed disparity by
                                                                  household language grew larger.

                   -    ae                                       Members with or without disabilities all had reductions in of ED use. However, the observed
                  Disability      Yes (2/2)       No                    ;                                    Lpetegs                 ,
                                                                 disparity grew larger as members without disabilities saw a larger improvement.
                                                  N/A
                                                  (observed | The observed disparity in ED utilization between rural and urban members with mental illness
                  Rural/Urban | Yes (2/2)         disparity      was already small in 2017; both groups saw reductions in rates and the difference between
                                                  remain         the two groups remains negligible.
                                                  negligible)




    47    | Appendix B - Full Quantitative Findings
                                                Observed
                                  Most groups | disparity
Measure           Breakout        improved?     reduced?    | Observations
                               Statewide change              Statewide the measure saw a large improvement of 14.9 percentage points for children age 6-
                                              6               14 receiving at least one dental sealant, from 2014 to 2019 (12.0% to 26.9%).

                                                              By gender, both male and female members     had improvements of about 15 percentage points
                  Gender          Ves 2           Yes        for each group, and the difference remains small (rate for female members is slightly higher).

                                                              By race and ethnicity, all groups saw improvements in dental sealants. The overall spread
                                  Yes (8/8
                                         ,                    between groups also decreased by 12.5%, suggesting the observed disparity was notably
                  REALD R/E       excluding       Yes                                                          ,                                   ,
                                  TALIA                       reduced. Hispanic/Latino members saw the largest improvement of 17.3 percentage points;
                                                              Black/African American saw the smallest improvement of 9.9 percentage points.

                                                             All household language groups saw improvements. Spanish-speaking members saw the largest
                                  Yes (6/6                    improvement (+19.3 percentage points), followed by Other (15.5 percentage points), and
    Dental        Language        excluding       Yes        English-speaking members (+14.6 points). Russian-speaking members saw the smallest
Sealants (DS)                     unknown)                   improvement of 6.9 percentage points. The spread between groups decreased by 16.7%,
                                                             suggesting the observed disparity by household language was largely reduced.

                                                             Children with or without disabilities all saw improvement for getting dental sealants, and the
                                                             observed disparity reduced slightly. In the baseline year (2014) the dental sealant rate for
                  Disability      Yes (2/2)       Yes        children with disabilities was 8%, lower than children without disabilities at 12.1%. Even
                                                             though children without disabilities saw greater improvement by 2019, children with
                                                             disabilities also got closer to the statewide average.

                                                              Both rural and urban populations saw significant improvements in the sealants measure and
                                                             the observed disparity greatly reduced (27.9% reduction in the spread). In 2014, the dental
                  Rural/Urban | Yes (2/2)         Yes        sealant rate for the rural population was 7.9%, about half of that for the urban population at
                                                              14.6%. By 2019, the rates for both groups saw large improvements and came close to 27%.




    48    | Appendix B - Full Quantitative Findings
                                                Observed
                                  Most groups | disparity
Measure            Breakout       improved?     reduced?        | Observations
                                                                 Statewide the measure saw an improvement of 2 percentage points from 2014 to 2019. The
                               Statewide change                   improvement was slightly larger for accessing routine care (CAHPS Question 6) compared to
                                                                  urgent needs (Question 4, needed care right away).

Child CAHPS                                                      Five of the race and ethnicity groups saw improvement in the Access to Care composite and
  Access to                                                      the observed disparity decreased (the spread reduced by 2.6%). However, CAHPS does
    Care           CAHPS R/E      Yes (5/8)       Yes            contain small sample sizes for several race and ethnicity groups. Of groups with larger sample
 Composite                                                       sizes: White and Hispanic/Latino members saw improvements in both accessing urgent and
                                                                  routine care; Asian members saw a large improvement in accessing routine care.

                   Health                                        Access to care worsened for children with fair or poor health status, particularly for accessing
                   Status         No (1/2)        No             routine care (declined by 10 percentage points). The disparity between children of different
                                                                  health statuses increased.
                                                                 Statewide the measure saw a small improvement of 1 percentage point from 2014 to 2019.
                               Statewide change                  The improvement was slightly larger for accessing routine care (CAHPS Q6) compared to
                                                                  urgent care (Q4 needed care right away).
                                                  N/A
                                                  (observed                     ,                                                     ,    ,
Adult caHps      | Gender         Yes (2/2)       diseeritey     Access to care improved for both male and female, and the observed disparity between the
                                                         ,       two groups remain negligible.
  Access to                                       remain
    Care                                          negligible)
 Composite                                                       Half of the R/E groups saw improvement in Access to Care composite and the observed
                   CAHPS R/E      No (4/8)        No             disparity grew larger (the spread increased by 4%). However, CAHPS does contain small
                                                                 sample sizes for several R/E groups. White saw improvements in both accessing urgent and
                                                                  routine care. Hispanic/Latino saw a large decrease in accessing routine care.
                   Health         No (0/2)        No             Access to care worsened for members with good/very good self-reported health status but
                   Status                                        maintained the same for members with fair/poor health status.




    AQ     | Appendix B - Full Quantitative Findings
 Effective Contraceptive Use (ECU) measure 2014 - 2019
 Rate = percent of women      age 15-50 utilizing higher tier contraceptive methods
                                                      ECU_ 2014          ECU_2019         Change
 Total                                                         32.3%            49.7%          17.5%

 REALD_RE                                             ECU_Rate14         ECU_Rate19     | Change
 Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander                           33.7%            46.7%          13.0%
 Middle Eastern or North African                               27.7%            42.8%          15.1%
 Black or African American                                     34.7%            47.5%          12.7%
 American Indian or Alaskan Native                             35.2%            52.6%          17.4%
 Asian                                                         27.8%            40.0%          12.2%
 Hispanic/Latino                                               31.4%            47.1%          15.7%
 White                                                         32.4%            51.6%          19.3%
 Other                                                         26.5%            43.4%          16.9%
 Unknown                                                       14.4%            26.3%          11.9%
 Avg     PDTM                                                  13.9%            13.2%          -0.7%

 Language                                             ECU_ 2014          ECU_ 2019        Change
 English                                                       34.0%            51.2%          17.2%
 Spanish                                                       23.1%            36.1%          12.9%
 Russian                                                          8.8%          16.4%              7.7%
 Vietnamese                                                    18.2%            33.6%          15.4%
 Chinese languages                                             20.3%            31.1%          10.8%
 Other                                                         24.3%            34.7%          10.4%
 Unknown/Undetermined                                          29.0%            45.7%          16.7%
 Avg     PDTM                                                  31.7%            29.4%          -2.4%

 Note for color coding: ECU rate increase is improvement
 Average PDTM      (spread) decrease is reduction of observed disparity - improvement
 Green = measure improvement or observed disparity reduced
 Red = measure declined or increased observed disparity
 Yellow = change <0.5%




50     | Appendix B - Full Quantitative Findings
 Effective Contraceptive Use (ECU) measure 2014 - 2019
 Rate = percent of women    age 15-50 utilizing higher tier contraceptive methods
 Disability                                         ECU_2014         ECU_2019       Change
 No                                                         33.2%           49.8%        16.6%
 Yes                                                        22.3%           48.5%        26.3%
 Avg_PDTM                                                   17.0%            1.3%       -15.7%

 RURAL_URBAN                                        ECU_2014         ECU_2019       Change
 Rural                                                      32.5%           53.0%        20.5%
 Urban                                                      32.1%           47.7%        15.6%
 Avg_PDTM                                                    0.6%            5.3%          4.7%
 Note for color coding:
 ECU rate increase is improvement
 Average PDTM (spread) decrease is reduction of observed disparity -
 improvement
 Green = measure improvement or observed disparity reduced
 Red = measure declined or increased observed disparity
 Yellow = change <0.5%




51   | Appendix B - Full Quantitative Findings
 Disparity MHED measure 2017 - 2019
 Rate = ED visits per 1000 member months for adults with history of mental illness
                                                                              MHED_2017      MHED_2019      PCT Change
 Total                                                                               105.3           99.1                 -5.9%

 Gender                                                                       MHED_2017      MHED_2019      PCT Change
 Female                                                                              108.1          100.6                 -6.9%
 Male                                                                                 99.9           96.4                 -3.5%
 Avg_PDTM                                                                             3.9%          2.1%                  -1.8%

 RE_REALD                                                                             2017          2019 | PCT Change
 Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander                                                 125.0          109.2                -12.6%
 Middle Eastern or North African                                                      91.8           87.2                 -5.0%
 Black or African American                                                           132.0          126.0                 -4.6%
 American Indian or Alaskan Native                                                   134.1          124.9                 -6.9%
 Asian                                                                                86.3           75.6                -12.4%
 Hispanic/Latino                                                                     104.0           96.8                 -6.9%
 White                                                                               102.7           97.5                 -5.1%
 Other                                                                                73.7           73.9                  0.2%
 9 Unknown                                                                            25.9           33.4                29.0%
 Avg_PDTM                                                                            23.5%         21.6%                  -1.8%
     Note for color coding:
     MHED   rate is lower the better
     Average PDTM (spread) decrease is reduction of observed disparity -
     improvement
     Green = measure improvement or observed disparity reduced
     Red = measure declined or increased observed disparity
     Yellow = change <0.5%




52    | Appendix B - Full Quantitative Findings
 Disparity MHED measure 2017 - 2019
 Rate = ED visits per 1000 member months for adults with history of mental illness
                                                                                  MHED_2017       MHED_2019       PCT Change
 English                                                                                 106.7           100.2                  -6.2%
 Spanish                                                                                   79.0            76.1                 -3.8%
 Russian                                                                                   57.0            66.9                17.5%
 Vietnamese                                                                                35.6            36.9                  3.4%
 Chinese languages                                                                         71.1            31.5                -55.7%
 Other                                                                                     77.5            77.7                  0.3%
 Unknown/Undetermined                                                                      71.9            65.5                 -8.9%
 Avg_PDTM                                                                                32.7%           34.8%                   2.1%

 Disability                                                                       MHED_2017       MHED_2019       PCT Change
 No                                                                                        98.0            91.6                 -6.5%
 Yes                                                                                      132.2           129.2                 -2.3%
 Avg_PDTM                                                                                16.2%           18.9%                   2.7%
 RURAL_URBAN                                                                      MHED_2017       MHED_2019       PCT Change
 Rural                                                                                    104.8            98.7                 -5.8%
 Urban                                                                                    105.4            99.0                 -6.1%
 Avg_PDTM                                                                                 0.3%            0.3%                   0.0%
 Note for color coding:
 MHED      rate is lower the better
 Average PDTM       (spread) decrease is reduction of observed disparity - improvement
 Green = measure improvement or observed disparity reduced
 Red = measure declined or increased observed disparity
 Yellow = change <0.5%




53     | Appendix B - Full Quantitative Findings
 2019 Percent adult mbrs with history of mental illness (in MHED
 measure denominator)
 Total                                                             31.8% |
                                   RE_REALD
 Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander                               30.3%
 Middle Eastern or North African                                   24.9%
 Black or African American                                         31.7%
 American Indian or Alaskan Native                                 39.1%
 Asian                                                             18.0%
 Hispanic/Latino                                                   23.1%
 White                                                             34.3%
 Other                                                             28.5%
 Unknown                                                           15.3%
                                   Language
 English                                                           33.3%
 Spanish                                                           12.9%
 Russian                                                            8.0%
 Vietnamese                                                        12.6%
 Chinese languages                                                  6.9%
 Other                                                             22.9%
                                RURAL_URBAN
 Rural                                                             31.1%
 Urban                                                             32.3%




54   | Appendix B - Full Quantitative Findings
 Dental Sealant (DS) measure 2014 - 2019
 Rate = percent of children age 6-14 received at least one dental sealant in measurement year
                                                                                                DS_ 2014    | DS   2019    | Change
 Total                                                                                              12.0%          26.9%       14.9%


 Gender                                                                                         DS_ 2014    | DS   2019    | Change
 Female                                                                                             12.6%          27.8%       15.2%
 Male                                                                                               11.4%          26.0%       14.6%
 Avg     PDTM                                                                                        5.1%           3.3%        -1.7%


 RE_REALD                                                                                       DS_ 2014    | DS   2019    | Change
 Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander                                                                10.0%          24.4%       14.4%
 Middle Eastern or North African                                                                    21.3%          32.6%       11.3%
 Black or African American                                                                          13.7%          23.6%         9.9%
 American Indian or Alaskan Native                                                                  11.9%          27.1%       15.2%
 Asian                                                                                              15.5%          29.1%       13.6%
 Hispanic/Latino                                                                                    13.7%          31.0%       17.3%
 White                                                                                              10.3%          24.4%       14.1%
 Other                                                                                              12.9%          23.9%       11.0%
 Unknown                                                                                             9.1%          26.6%       17.5%
 Avg     PDTM                                                                                       22.3%           9.8%       -12.5%
     Note for color coding:
     DS measure rate increase is improvement
     Average PDTM    (spread) decrease is reduction of observed disparity - improvement
     Green = measure improvement or observed disparity reduced
     Red = measure declined or increased observed disparity
     Yellow = change <0.5%




 Dental Sealant (DS) measure 2014 - 2019

55     | Appendix B - Full Quantitative Findings
 Rate = percent of children age 6-14 received at least one dental sealant in measurement year
 Language                                                                                        DS_2014    | DS_2019 | Change
 English                                                                                            10.5%          25.1%       14.6%
 Spanish                                                                                            15.2%          34.5%       19.3%
 Russian                                                                                            15.4%          22.3%         6.9%
 Vietnamese                                                                                         16.0%          28.3%       12.3%
 Chinese languages                                                                                  21.6%          34.1%       12.5%
 Other                                                                                              16.0%          31.5%       15.5%
 Unknown/Undetermined                                                                               12.8%          28.2%       15.5%
 STDEV                                                                                               3.4%           4.5%         1.1%
 Avg PDTM                                                                                           31.9%          15.2%       -16.7%

 Disability                                                                                     DS_ 2014    | DS   2019    | Change
 No                                                                                                 12.1%          27.1%       15.0%
 Yes                                                                                                 8.0%          18.6%       10.5%
 STDEV                                                                                               2.9%           6.0%        3.2%
 Avg PDTM                                                                                           16.9%          15.8%       -1.1%

 RURAL_URBAN                                                                                    DS 2014     | DS_2019 | Change
 Rural                                                                                               7.9%          26.8%       18.9%
 Urban                                                                                              14.6%          26.9%       12.3%
 STDEV                                                                                               4.7%           0.1%       -4.7%
 Avg     PDTM                                                                                       28.0%           0.2%       -27.9%

 Note for color coding:
 DS measure rate increase is improvement
 Average PDTM      (spread) decrease is reduction of observed disparity - improvement
 Green = measure improvement or observed disparity reduced
 Red = measure declined or increased observed disparity
 Yellow = change <0.5%




56     | Appendix B - Full Quantitative Findings
 Adult CAHPS Access to Care Composite
 Average of Q4 and Q6

                                                 Adult Access      2014    | Adult Access      2019    | Change
 Total                                                             81.5%                       82.5%        1.0%

 Gender                                          Adult   Access    2014    | Adult   Access    2019    | Change
 Male                                                              81.5%                       82.7%        1.2%
 Female                                                            81.0%                       82.7%        1.7%
 Avg_PDTM                                                           0.3%                        0.3%        0.0%


 Race                                            Adult   Access    2014    | Adult   Access    2019    | Change
 American Indian or Alaskan Native                                65.0%T                       86.9%       21.9%
 Asian                                                            81.5%T                       67.5%      -14.1%
 Black or African American                                        70.5%T                       76.9%        6.4%
 Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander                              72.5%t                      50.0%t      -22.5%
 Hispanic/Latino                                                   79.5%                       76.6%        -3.0%
 White                                                             82.5%                       84.7%        2.2%
 Other                                                             78.5%                       85.4%        6.9%
 Multi                                                             78.5%                       78.4%        -0.1%
 Avg_PDTM                                                           7.0%                       11.0%        4.0%
 Tt: sample size <30

 Health Status                                   Adult Access      2014 | Adult Access         2019 | Change
 Very good/good                                                    82.0%                       80.9%     -1.1%
 Fair/poor                                                         80.5%                       80.5%        0.0%
 Avg_PDTM                                                           0.9%                        2.1%        1.2%
 Note for coloring:
 Access to Care rate increase is improvement
 Average PDTM      (spread) decrease is reduction of observed disparity - improvement
 Green = measure improvement or observed disparity reduced
 Red = measure declined or increased observed disparity
 Yellow = change <0.5%

57   | Appendix B - Full Quantitative Findings
 Child CAHPS Access to Care Composite
 Average of Q4 and Q6

                                           Child   Access _2014    | Child   Access   2019       Change
 Total                                                    87.0%                        89.0%        2.0%

 Race                                      Child Access_2014       | Child Access 2019           Change
 American Indian or Alaskan Native                       89.5%T                        87.7%       -1.8%
 Asian                                                   78.0%T                       60.2%t |    -17.8%
 Black or African American                               80.5%T                       87.6%t        7.1%
 Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander                     58.5%t                       90.0%t       31.5%
 Hispanic/Latino                                          83.0%                        86.0%        2.9%
 White                                                    89.5%                        94.6%        5.1%
 Other                                                    83.0%                       88.2%t        5.2%
 Multi                                                    90.0%                        89.7%       -0.3%
 Avg_PDTM                                                   8.6%                        6.0%       -2.6%
 Tt: sample size <30

 Health Status                             Child Access_2014 | Child Access 2019                 Change
 Very good/good                                         87.0%                 87.7%                 0.7%
 Fair/poor                                                85.5%                        79.7%       -5.9%
 Avg_PDTM                                                   0.9%                        6.0%        5.1%
 Note for coloring:
 Access to Care rate increase is improvement
 Average PDTM      (spread) decrease is reduction of observed disparity - improvement
 Green = measure improvement or observed disparity reduced
 Red = measure declined or increased observed disparity
 Yellow = change <0.5%




58   | Appendix B - Full Quantitative Findings
