                       K-12 Writng- ASSESSMENT
                    Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework— Writing          (Writing Framework)

                A comprehensive writing assessment system for K-12 is explicitly linked to
                  writing goals and uses multiple data sources to evaluate student writing.

                                    alin
                                   vw
                                   vw
                                   wo



                                Assessment




  Schools
                                  o



A Comprehensive Writing Assessment System:
     ©      Relies on measures of writing that demonstrate reliability and validity for the
            purpose(s) they are being used (e.g., timed assessments to evaluate fluency
            and productivity)
     ©      Includes writing assessments and measures that are linked explicitly to
            writing goals
     ©      Is organized, integrated, and composed of multiple sources of data (e.g.,
            student reading data, formative measures to monitor progress, summative
            assessments to examine writing achievement, and learner-centered portfolios
            that discuss student goals and provide multiple writing samples that illustrate
            student progression through the writing process)
     ©      Uses data from writing assessments, portfolios, and teacher judgments to
            make informed instructional decisions regarding the areas in which students
            might need additional instructional support.
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



     Using educational assessment data to make informed instructional and educational decisions
is the foundation of the Oregon K-12 Writing Framework. The Framework’s assessment system includes
reading and writing assessments because, although the focus of this Framework is writing, research has
demonstrated a strong relationship between reading and writing (Abbot & Berninger, 1993; Berninger,
Cartwright, Yates, Swanson, & Abbot, 1994; Fitzgerald & Shanahan, 2000; Shanahan, 2010; Shanahan &
Lomax, 1986). Unlike the definition of “student reading assessments” that refers only to
assessments that have been conducted in a systematic and standardized manner, the definition of
“student writing assessments”           is broader due to the limited number of standardized, adequate
measures to assess a complex and iterative construct like writing.



                   Alignment of K-12 Writing Goals and Assessment
     Just as   a comprehensive assessment system explicitly linked to reading goals Is a critical component
of a school-wide reading system (Consortium on Reading Excellence, 2008; National Reading Panel,
2000), an assessment system designed to monitor students’ progress toward writing goals is similarly
important. The Framework’s assessment system for grades K-12 can best be achieved by
establishing synergy between summative and formative writing assessments                            (Brookhart, 2003;
Plake, 2003). Synergy is obtained by the use and integration of large-scale, or summative assessments
to measure student achievement and formative assessments designed to monitor student acquisition of
critical writing skills.

     Reliable assessments of student writing performance are starting to become available for the
elementary, middle, and secondary grades (Espin, et al., 2000; Jewell & Malecki, 2005; Lembke,                        Deno, &
Hall, 2003). State-level assessments, however, are not a “complete portrait of a student’s writing
abilities...[but rather]   a snapshot of what a student can do with a particular prompt, limited time and
space, and without teacher or peer input” (Oregon Department of Education [ODE], 2005).                      As such,
additional methods for examining students’ acquisition and mastery of writing skills are needed (Benson &
Campbell, 2010; Cho, 2003).


                           The Current State of Writing Assessment
    Student performance on the writing subtests of the Oregon Assessment of Knowledge and Skills
(OAKS) emphasizes the need for an increased instructional focus on writing in Oregon. In 2010-2011,
41% of fourth grade students, 52% of seventh grade students, and 68% of high school students met or
exceeded standards set for writing performance on the OAKS (see
http://www.ode.state.or.us/news/announcements/announcement.aspx?ID=7585&T
                                                                   ypelD=5).

     Other states have similar challenges to Oregon’s. One potential explanation for students’ poor
performance is that writing receives significantly less instructional time in the elementary grades than
other content areas such as reading and mathematics and/or as a component of science, social science,
or language instruction in the middle and secondary grades (Moats, Foorman, & Taylor, 2006).
Additionally, writing is a very complex construct and cognitive process to measure (Cho, 2003;
Olinghouse, 2009), and there is currently debate on how best to measure it (Benson & Campbell, 2010;
Olinghouse, 2009). The development and implementation of assessments that efficiently and
appropriately measure writing need to be a priority (National Commission on Writing, 2003).




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                                WA-2
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



    Some argue that writing cannot be effectively or appropriately measured by multiple-choice measures
designed to assess students’ knowledge of the component skills of writing (e.g., grammar, capitalization,
punctuation, etc.) (Huot, 1990; Miller & Crocker, 1990) or by decontextualized, traditional essay tests that
evaluate student writing at a discrete point in time (Cho, 2003; Huot, 1996). That is to say, assessment
via indirect methods designed to examine students’ ability to effectively and appropriately use writing
conventions, or direct methods that require students to produce a written product in response to a
standard prompt, when implemented independently, may not be able to provide educators with accurate
representations of students’ writing skills because each method of assessment measures different
aspects of writing (Benson & Campbell, 2010; Miller            & Crocker, 1990).

    As a result of these findings, it is recommended that the integration of multiple types of
assessments within a comprehensive assessment system                       be used to allow educators to effectively
and efficiently monitor students’ acquisition and mastery of the component skills of writing (e.g.,
handwriting fluency and legibility, spelling, grammar, punctuation, etc.), their ability to create coherent and
organized written products, and their progress through the steps of the writing process (Hessler, Konrad,
& Alber-Morgan, 2009; National Commission on Writing, 2003; Olinghouse, 2009). In particular, the
assessment system for the Oregon K-12 Framework--Writing will consist of combinations of the following
data sources:

                Integration of Multiple Data Sources in a K-12 Writing Assessment
                                               System

                  1.   Reading Assessments
                  2.   Formative Assessment with quantitative scoring (e.g., writing
                       productivity) and qualitative scoring (e.g., holistic rubrics, rubrics with
                       primary trait and analytic scoring) of writing samples

                  3.   Summative Assessment (standardized assessments)

                  4.   Instructionally-based Writing Portfolios

    Student performance on measures of reading may include, for example, performance on measures of
basic reading skills such as oral reading fluency and/or reading comprehension.                 Standardized,
formative measures that score students’ writing samples for productivity, such as total words
written, total words spelled correctly, and correct word sequences, can provide educators with a quick
index of students’ fluency with critical component skills of writing. It is recommended,             however, that these
productivity measures be used in conjunction with formative assessments that use qualitative scoring
approaches (e.g., rubrics that use primary trait and analytic scoring systems) and instructionally-based
writing portfolios to provide data-based insight into student writing progress.

    Unlike reading assessments that have been clearly designed for four specific purposes — to screen
students for reading difficulties, to monitor students’ progress toward the achievement of grade-level
reading goals, to diagnose specific reading difficulties for the purposes of developing and implementing
individualized interventions, and to determine whether or not students have met grade-level reading goals
— the distinction between types of available writing assessments is not as clear.                       Benchmarks for
periodically evaluating student performance and quantifying degrees of student risk have yet to be
established. Additionally, formative, standardized measures such as Curriculum Based Measures




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-3
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



for Writing (CBM-W) can be used informally to monitor student acquisition of writing fluency but
are not yet suitable for evaluating student growth              (Olinghouse, 2009; Rose, 2007).

    The subsequent sections of this chapter discuss four data sources recommended for a
comprehensive K-12 writing system: Data Source 1: Reading Assessments;                        Data Source 2:
Formative Assessment,          Data Source 3: Summative Assessment, and Data Source 4:
Instructionally-Based Writing Portfolios. Each section discusses research, presents an overview of
how assessment and data sources can be used, and provides recommendations based on available
evidence. Examples are also included to illustrate the content discussed. Given the emerging nature of
research on writing assessment, it’s important to note that the examples don’t represent any one
“research-based” or single “correct” assessment or scoring approach.                        For example, just because a
rubric is used to illustrate a type of scoring system doesn’t mean that specific rubric is the best and only
available option. The sample rubric, however, is selected to illustrate key elements of the content, even
though there may be strengths and limitations in the example, so that teachers, schools, and districts can
develop their own writing assessments and scoring approaches based on recommendations                         in this
chapter. Overall, the importance of aligning any formative assessment, scoring approach
(quantitative and qualitative), and writing portfolio system with student goals and instructional
purpose is emphasized. Finally, unless specifically noted, the Oregon Department of Education does
not exclusively endorse any of the sample materials and examples presented in this chapter.



Data Source 1: Reading Assessments—The Reading and Writing
Relationship
     Because both reading and writing require knowledge and familiarity with the alphabetic orthography
of the language, it is not surprising that some degree of relationship exists between these two
fundamental literacy skills. Despite the interrelationship between reading and writing, however, instruction
in reading alone will not facilitate writing development nor will instruction in writing alone facilitate reading
development (Abbott & Berninger, 1993; Berninger, Garcia,               & Abbott, 2010; Fitzgerald & Shanahan,
2000; Moats, Foorman, & Taylor, 2006). Although reading skills may support the development of writing
skills and vice versa, explicit instruction and opportunities to practice both skills are required for
students to become proficient readers and writers. This is due, in part, to the fact that although these
receptive and productive language tasks (reading and writing, respectively) may rely on similar
processes, they nonetheless are independent skills that require students to apply their knowledge of the
grapho-phonemic, spelling, and grammar rules of English in different ways. Furthermore, the
independence of these skills may explain why it is possible for some students to be poor readers but
good writers, or good readers and poor writers (Cox, Shanahan, & Sulzby, 1990; Shanahan, 1988) — or
more commonly, simultaneously poor readers and poor writers or good readers and good writers (Juel,
1988).
    The independence of reading and writing skills is supported by the fact that as students learn to read
and write, they progress through different developmental stages specific to each skill (Berninger, et al.,
1994; Fitzgerald & Shanahan, 2000). In particular, Fitzgerald and Shanahan (2000) propose that four
kinds of knowledge provide the foundation for reading and writing development:                          (1) meta-
knowledge, or understanding the purposes of reading and writing and being able to consciously monitor
one’s own knowledge; (2) domain knowledge about substance and content, which takes into account
students’ prior knowledge as well as content knowledge created while engaging in reading and writing




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                              WA-4
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                 ASSESSMENT — Writing



tasks; (3) knowledge about universal text attributes, including grapho-phonic knowledge (i.e.,
phonological, grapheme, and morphological awareness); and (4) procedural knowledge and skill that
supports students’ ability to access, use, and generate knowledge in any of the aforementioned areas
while reading and writing. According to this developmental model, students rely on each of these types
of knowledge to varying degrees as they progress through six phases of development (e.g., initial
literacy, confirmation and fluency, reading and writing for learning, etc.) from early childhood
through the adult years.
     Research indicates that students’ performance on various measures of reading is related to
their performance on various measures of writing. In the elementary grades, for example, significant
relationships have been found between the following reading and writing measures: real word and
pseudo-word reading and writing tasks (Abbott & Berninger, 1993), reading comprehension and the level
of cohesion in narrative and expository writing tasks (Cox, Shanahan, & Sulzby, 1990), word reading and
reading comprehension and basic spelling and writing tasks (Lerkannen, Rasku-Puttonen, Anuola &
Numi, 2004), and letter Knowledge, beginning word reading, and concepts of print with measures of letter
writing (Ritchey, 2008). Less research has been conducted in the intermediate grades, but preliminary
studies indicate that students with stronger reading comprehension skills may be able to produce better-
organized, more coherent written compositions than students with weaker comprehension skills (Parodi,
2007).

    Moreover, research also indicates that explicitly teaching text structure, particularly of expository texts
(e.g., description, enumeration, sequence, compare/contrast, etc.) can support students’ appropriate use
of text structure in their own writing (Dickson, 1999; Englert, Stewart, & Hiebert, 1988; Richgels, McGee,
Lomax, & Sheard,      1987). Knowledge about text structure, knowledge of the writing process, and the
integration of reading and writing mutually support each other and contribute to improved reading
comprehension and writing performance (Dickson, 1999). Knowledge of text structure, for example, not
only helps readers distinguish important from unimportant information, and organize and recall that
information for later use, but also helps writers construct a framework for organizing and editing their own
texts. Overall, the integration of reading and writing have three primary benefits: (a) content area reading
provides students with information to incorporate in their written products, (b) writing about the content
they have read appears to promote and enhance “higher level” thinking, and (c) written texts produced in
response to reading are typically of greater length and higher quality than texts not written in response to
reading.



Recommendations for Implementation:

    v      For students in grades K-12, use reading assessments to help inform what is known about
           student writing performance. For example, knowing that a student might have high levels of
           narrative comprehension knowledge can help inform an understanding of how story grammar
           might be applied in student writing.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-5
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



Data Source 2:             Formative Assessments—Informal                             Assessments for
Learning
    The use of formative writing assessment helps determine what students currently Know and are able
to do, as well as potential areas of need that require evidence-based adjustments to instruction.
Formative assessment is “concerned with how judgments about. . .student responses [performances,
pieces, or works] can be used to shape and improve the student’s competence” (Sadler, 1989).
Formative assessment is the use of assessment                for learning because the results of the assessment
are used to adapt instruction to meet students’ needs (Black & Wiliam, 1998). Therefore, the primary
goal of conducting formative assessment is to determine the degree to which a student is (or is
not) making writing progress and obtain data that can be used to make instructional decisions
and plan next steps for instruction (Calfee & Miller, 2007). Formative assessment is not used to
evaluate the level of knowledge or skill students have acquired.
    Formative assessment of student writing is a form of curriculum-based measurement (CBM), a
procedure in which multiple, standardized, efficient probes of comparable difficulty are administered
periodically for screening and progress monitoring to examine students’ acquisition of critical skills (Deno,
1985). For example, Writing CBM (W-CBM) probes can be administered three to four times per year for
screening, and on a weekly or biweekly basis to all students in the bottom 25% of the class. If used for
progress monitoring, the probes might alternate genre each week (e.g., Week                  1-argument, Week 2-
explanatory, Week 3-arugment, etc.) or align with instruction focused on a specific genre (e.g., an 8-week
instructional unit on argument would include weekly or biweekly progress monitoring with probes aligned
with argument genre). Overall, formative assessment is intended to be informal and efficient.
Because “assessment for learning” is the focus, W-CBM                    administration occurs within the context
of writing instruction. Ideally, the time scheduled for writing probes becomes part of the regular
routines of writing instruction.

    Each W-CBM       probe consists of a set of standardized administration directions and a prompt
that dictates the purpose, content, and overall focus of a student writing sample. (See Chapter
Resources to view a sample probe with standardized directions and a prompt.) The probe is given for a
timed amount (ranging from three to ten minutes) to obtain a productivity writing sample, or administered
for a reasonable, but specified, duration (e.g., 30-minutes, 45-minutes, 60-minutes, class period, multiple
class periods) to obtain a full writing sample that can be scored for quality. Probes can also combine
assessment purposes by asking students to mark their papers to indicate the end of the timed component
(e.g., “Put a line under the last word you wrote when | said stop.”), but continue writing to complete a full
writing sample (e.g., “After you underline the word, you may continue writing your essay.”). When
structuring a probe with a timed and extended writing component, both productivity and quality can be
examined during scoring.

    Writing samples that are produced from the administration of formative writing probes are
scored using quantitative (e.g., “counts” or “tallies” of the number of words written per 3-minutes) and/or
qualitative scoring procedures (e.g., rubric focused on the writing domains of content, focus,
organization, style, and conventions). Before detailing how writing can be timed and scored for the
purpose of formative assessment, writing prompts will be discussed in more detail.

    Writing prompts should be explicit, authentic, engaging, and set the stage for the writing task
(Calfee & Miller, 2007). Well-designed writing prompts give clear directions about what is expected,
such as the amount of time required for writing (Miller          & Crocker, 1990; Pierce & O’Malley,        1992) and
identify the purpose of the composition. With explicit purpose and clear directions, students can apply



OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                              WA-6
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



and demonstrate their knowledge about writing. For example, words used in a prompt, such as fell,
explain, describe, and convince, specify whether writing should be framed as informational or argument.
Clear identification of writing purpose in the prompt is essential. Students should not complete writing
probes simply for the sake of writing (Calfee & Miller, 2007).

    Consideration of the content of prompts is also important. Although writing prompts should be
thought-provoking and allow latitude for expression, they also need to be specific enough to ensure that
all students respond to     a common theme, topic, or genre (Calfee & Miller, 2007). It is very difficult to
effectively evaluate the progress of students in a class if all the writing samples focus on different genres
and topics. For this reason, a prompt can provide students with an opportunity to select an option
from a list of topics within the same genre. For example, students might be provided with a writing
prompt focused on explanatory writing with three different writing options that could be selected, such as
(a) explain how to celebrate a special event or holiday (b) exp/ain why a person deserves to receive a
particular award or honor, or (c) exp/ain what actions a classroom/school can take to become more
environmentally friendly. Therefore, students write about a topic that interests them the most (a, b, orc),
and all of the student writing samples can be scored using            a common     rubric (e.g., primary trait rubric
focused on the critical features of explanatory writing). Giving students the option to respond to their
choice topic within a selected genre increases the possibility of student interest and motivation while
providing for a common focus for scoring and feedback across student writing samples (Pierce &
O’Malley,     1992).

    Overall, writing prompts should: (a) be grade-level appropriate, (b) address student experience and
background knowledge, and (c) reflect writing goals (e.g., the writing genres that students are learning to
write) (Pierce & O’Malley, 1992). A writing prompt that asks students to explain how they felt the first time
they drove a car would not be appropriate for young writers because they have not had a car driving
experience. In addition, if students live predominately in an urban setting, prompting them to explain a
camping experience may not be appropriate, unless of course, students read, discussed, received
instruction related to outdoor living and camping-related topics. The importance of the background
knowledge and experience brought to writing cannot be understated. When students have familiarity with
a prompt’s topic, there is the increased likelihood of higher engagement,              motivation, and interest in the
task. As a result, writing quality can be directly affected by a prompt.



Recommendations for Implementation

    v¥   AW-CBM process of formative assessment should be established in grades K-12, and include a
         schedule for screening and progress monitoring in which multiple, standardized, efficient probes
         of comparable difficulty are administered to examine students’ acquisition of critical skills (Deno,
            1985).
    v_   The time scheduled for writing probes should be informal, efficient, and become part of the
         regular routines of writing instruction.
    v    W-CBM probes should include writing prompts that (a) are from different genres, (b) are grade-
            level appropriate and experientially appropriate, (c) are authentic, meaningful, and engaging, and
            (d) include clearly specified directions, purpose, and content.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                               WA-7
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                 ASSESSMENT — Writing



Score Writing Probes Quantitatively with Productivity Counts
    W-CBM      has received attention in the field of educational research recently as researchers and
practitioners collaborate to develop brief, efficient approaches for administration and scoring writing
productivity that are appropriate for a wide range of grade levels (Benson & Campbell, 2010; McMaster
& Campbell, 2008; McMaster & Espin, 2007; McMaster, Du, & Pétursdottir, 2009). W-CBMs focus
primarily on fluency of language use and fluency of written expression. Scores on W-CBMs are often
quantified by counting the production of a range of writing components (e.g., total words written, total
words spelled correctly, correct word sequences, etc.) (Lerkannen, et al., 2004). The same indices or
scoring approaches, however, may not be appropriate across all grade levels.                        For example,
adjustments in how a writing sample is scored need to account for writing development and older
students’ more sophisticated writing skills (Espin, et al., 2000; Jewell          & Malecki, 2005; McMaster & Espin,
2007).



Elementary Grades

Because students need to have “automatized” many of the component skills of written language
production (e.g., handwriting fluency and legibility, spelling, basic sentence structure, etc.) to effectively
devote attention and working memory tasks to the planning, organization, and composition of written texts
(Moats, Foorman, & Taylor, 2006), it seems reasonable to evaluate students’ acquisition of these
critical component skills in the early elementary grades. The following scoring approaches have
recently been developed to examine young students’ fluency with critical component skills:

                                                                                                     Score Responses
                                                                                                      Produced within
                                                                                                     Untimed or Timed
 Grade(s)    | Scoring Focus                              Description/Purpose                           Specifications

               Letter Writing               Examines students’ ability to write upper and          | Untimed
                                            lower case letters from dictation (52 letters)

               Alphabet    Writing          Examines students’ ability to accurately and              1 minute
    K!                                      fluently write randomly dictated alphabet
                                            letters (similar to Letter Naming Fluency in
                                            reading assessment, but students write
                                            dictated letters rather than read them)

               Sound Spelling                Examines students’ ability to write letters from | Untimed
                                            dictated sounds (25 sounds)

               Real Word Spelling           Examines students’ ability to spell                       Untimed
                                            Consonant-Vowel-Consonant (CVC) real
                                            words (5 word types)

               Nonsense Word                Examines students’ ability to spell CVC                   Untimed
               Spelling                     nonsense words (5 word types)




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-8
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                   ASSESSMENT — Writing




                                                                                                       Score Responses
                                                                                                           Produced within
                                                                                                       Untimed or Timed
 Grade(s)    | Scoring Focus                                 Description/Purpose                           Specifications

               Word Copying                   Examines students’ ability to copy printed               2 minutes
                                              words

               Sentence Copying               Examines students’ ability to copy sentences          | 3 minutes
   4-22                                       of 5-7 words

               Word Dictation                 Examines students’ ability to write dictated             3 minutes
                                              words

               Sentence Dictation             Examines students’ ability to copy dictated              3 minutes
                                              sentences of 5-7 words

 ‘Edwards (2000); Ritchey (2008); Berninger et al. (1997) “Lembke, Deno, & Hall (2003)

    A copy of an Alphabet-Writing assessment is included in the Resources section of this chapter
(Berninger et al, 1997; Edwards, 2000). Note how directions are standardized and the measure is timed
for 1-minute so alphabet-writing fluency can be evaluated. Unfortunately, benchmarks and progress
monitoring guidelines have not been established due to the Alphabet-Writing assessment’s use in
preliminary research. The Alphabet-Writing assessment, however, serves as an example of what a letter-
writing, spelling, or sentence-copying fluency measure might look like. The Alphabet-Writing assessment
can also be modified, enhanced, and used in the classroom to help evaluate handwriting fluency.
    Closer examination of the W-CBM            scoring approaches described above also reveals that the majority
evaluate the foundational skills students need to become proficient writers, such as handwriting legibility
and fluency (measured by Letter Writing, Alohabet Writing, Word Copying, and Sentence Copying) and
spelling. Although handwriting legibility and fluency are not directly specified in the CCSS for English
Language Arts & Literacy as Foundational Skills (with the exception of spelling proficiency as articulated
in Language Standard 2), the importance of handwriting legibility and fluency is implicitly recognized as
critical to students’ writing development for two reasons:

    1.    If handwriting is illegible and the message has been lost, a student’s writing efforts have
          been for naught; and

    2.    An absence of automaticity and fluency with handwriting skills may limit the cognitive
          attention students can devote to the content of their writing and the writing process
          (Berninger, 1999; Olinghouse & Santangelo, 2010) (similar to the relation between decoding and
          comprehension observed in reading; LaBerge & Samuels,                   1974; Perfetti, 1985).

    Moreover, research indicates that many activities in the early grades require fine motor skills. Once
movement patterns, such as those used while writing become established through repeated practice, they
are often resistant to change (Bradfield, 2009). Therefore, though fine motor skills are important for
handwriting, handwriting is important in the promotion of fine motor skills. It’s also important to
note that poor handwriting is not primarily related to poor fine motor skills, but rather to poor letter
knowledge in memory (Abbott & Berninger, 1993; Berninger, Abbott, et al., 1998). In essence, the poor



OREGON LITERACY PLAN                                Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-9
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                   ASSESSMENT — Writing



letter knowledge and the weak orthographic representation of letters in memory contribute to the
difficulties children with poor handwriting have with letter formation during writing. Overall, these findings
support the importance of explicit handwriting instruction, particularly for students who are struggling
with handwriting legibility and fluency, and for the periodic monitoring of student handwriting skills
progress.
    Common      scoring procedures for later elementary grades include:

              Total Words Written (TWW)            is based on the rate of word production. To calculate TWW,          the
              total number of words written during a 3-minute period is calculated. The following table
              provides directions for counting the number of words written and a scoring example. Note
              that incorrectly spelled words are counted for total words written.


                                                    Total Words Written
                                                       Per 3-Minutes


Scoring Directions

              A word is counted if it is separated from other words in the written material.

              Words are counted regardless of whether they are spelled correctly or are phonetically
              recognizable.

              Do not count a number that is not spelled out (e.g., 1987, 5, 44) as words.

              Count the title if one is written.

              Count proper nouns as words.
              If the student writes the story starter as part of the story, include these words in the count.


                                            Total Words Written

                                 Prompt:
                                 “When my video game started predicting
                                 the future, | knew | hadto... “
                                 Student Response:
                                 “got my mom to check it out | was ckerd it
                                 was hard to recat but my mom holped me
                                 then my brather came in to my room he
                                 holped me to but he left my room want
                                 down.”


                                        Total Words written per 3-minutes:                 39

*Scoring example from Shapiro, E. S. (2004). Academic skills problems. New York: Guilford.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                               Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework —      Writing                      WA-10
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



     Reliability for the TWW scoring approach is high (Shapiro, 2004). Preliminary research indicates that
a student’s TWW per 3-minute score is highly correlated with performance on both norm-referenced
achievement tests and teacher judgments of writing quality (Tindal                 & Marston, 1990). During preliminary
studies, use of TWW       per 3-minutes was also sensitive to student growth in written expression across 10-
and 16-week periods (Tindal & Marston, 1990).

    Unfortunately, benchmarks for TWW              per 3-minutes have not been established. The following
guidelines for using TWW scoring are provided to assist with progress monitoring. It’s extremely
important, however, to reinforce that the suggestions below are based on relatively few studies
and can only serve as informal guidance.

                                                  Informal Guidelines*
                                           Total Words Written per 3-Minutes

    e     lf the total words is less than 20, aim for doubling by the end of the school year.
    e = If total words written is between 25-30, aim for a 50% increase.

    e = If total words written is between 35-45, aim for a 25% increase.

    e     lf total words written is greater than 50, choose another fluency and productivity objective (e.g.,
          CWS, vocabulary).
    e     Refer to school district norms for written expression, if available
*The above guidelines are based on relatively few studies. Research on benchmarks and progress
monitoring for TWW per 3-minutes have not been established.

*Guidelines based on Deno, Mirkin       & Wessen/Parker & Tindal and Shapiro (2001).

          e   Words Spelled Correctly (WSC) is simply a calculation of the total number of words spelled
              correctly. Compare the scoring example below with the scoring example for TWW.                     Notice the
              difference in score when scoring focuses on correctly spelled words.

                                                   Words Spelled Correctly
                                                         Per 3-Minutes
Scoring   Directions
          e   Aword    is counted if it spelled correctly and follows the correct spelling conventions of written English.


                                           Words       Spelled Correctly
                                  ¢ Prompt:
                                     “When my video game started predicting the
                                     future, | Knew | had to. . .”


                                  ¢ Student Response:
                                     “got my mom to check it out | was ckerd it
                                     was hard to recat but my mom holped me
                                     then my brather came in to my room he
                                     holped me to but he left my room want down.”


                                   Total   words   spelled   correctly   per 3-minutes:      34




*Scoring example from Shapiro, E. S. (2004). Academic skills problems. New York: Guilford.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                                Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                           WA-11
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                 ASSESSMENT — Writing



     Even though WSC scoring has been used in formative assessment research, benchmarks and
guidelines for progress monitoring have not been established. Unfortunately, preliminary guidelines are
also not available.

          e   Correct Word Sequences (CWS) considers units of writing and their relation to one another
              (Espin, Shin, Deno, Skare, Robinson, Benner, 2000). CWS                provides an index of meaningful
              content (i.e, meaningful content based on conventionally correct grammar) and is sensitive to
              improvements in student writing (Espin, Scierka, Skare, & Halverson,               1999; Espin, Shin,
              Deno, Skare, Robinson, Benner, 2000). The table below provides general scoring directions
              and an example of CWS scoring. More detailed directions for scoring CWS are provided in
              the Resources section of this chapter.

                                                Correct Word Sequences
                                                      Per 3-Minutes


Scoring   Directions

          e   Start at the beginning of the writing sample and look at each successive pair of writing units (each
              writing sequence).

          e   Count as a word sequence the joining of two words together that are spelled correctly and are
              grammatically correct.

          e   Words in each writing sequence must also make sense within the context of a sentence.

          e   Don’t count numbers next to words in the total.

          e   Acaret (*) is used to mark the presence of a correct writing sequence.




                              Correct Word Sequences
                                                                                   Because the period
                   Since the first word is correct, it is                          is considered
                   marked as a correct writing                                     essential
                   sequence.                                                       punctuation, it is
                                                                                   joined with the
                                                                                   words before and
                                                                                   after it to make 2
                                                                                   correct writin
                              Alt*      was       *    dark       * .4             sequences. ,
                              Nobody * could seen
                              the “ trees “ of “ the
                              forrest.                                                    .
                                                                             Grammatical or
                                    \      Misspelled words                  syntactical errors are
                                           are not counted.                  not correct.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-12
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



     Similar to TWW and WSC, benchmarks for CWS per 3-minutes have not been established. The
following guideline for using CWS scoring is provided to assist with progress monitoring: a 1 to 1.5 gain
per month can be anticipated for total correct word sequences per 3-minutes (Shapiro, 2001). It is
extremely important, however, to reinforce that the 1 to 1.5 gain per month                     is a suggestion based
on relatively few studies and can only serve as informal guidance.

    Overall, quantitative scoring is typically used with student writing samples that have been timed for 1
to 3 minutes in the early elementary grades and 3 to 5 minutes in the later elementary grades. Planning
time, often around 30-seconds, is given before the timed writing begins.


Intermediate and Secondary Grades

    While the production-dependent scoring indices (e.g., TWW, WSC, CWS) are reliable and valid
for use with students in the elementary grades, similar results have not been obtained with these
same scoring indices for students in the middle and secondary grades (Espin, Scierka, Skare, &
Halverson, 1999; Espin, et al., 2000; Fewster & MacMillan, 2002). One potential explanation for this
finding is that using more basic scoring methods, such as Words Written and Correct Word
Sequences, obtain an accurate picture of students’ writing fluency, but not their writing accuracy
(Amato & Watkins, 2009; Jewell & Malecki, 2005).
    It is critical to address the issue of writing accuracy for students at the intermediate and secondary
grade levels because measures of writing accuracy relate more strongly to other writing criteria than
measures of writing fluency. Therefore, we recommend that more complex indices of performance, such
as Correct minus Incorrect Word Sequences (CIWS) and/or percentage of Correct Word
Sequences be the primary scoring method for students with basic mechanical writing difficulties in the
upper elementary, middle, and secondary grades because they account both for students’ writing
fluency and writing accuracy (McMaster & Campbell, 2008; Weissenburger & Espin, 2005).
Additionally, W-CBM      measures of longer duration (e.g., 5, 7, and 10 minutes with 3-minutes for planning)
have produced stronger reliability and validity coefficients for older students (Espin, et al., 2000;
McMaster & Campbell, 2000; Weissenburger & Espin, 2005), suggesting that longer duration W-CBM
probes be used in the upper grades. Remember,              however, that W-CBM         scoring focuses on fluency of
foundational writing skills but not the critical, higher-level writing strategies needed to plan,
generate, and revise text.      Other measures and scoring approaches must be used to evaluate the
quality of written content.

    In addition to the use of CIWS and percentage of CWS, there are other methods of scoring and
evaluation that can be used with students in the intermediate and secondary grades. Additional scoring
approaches recommended for consideration include (Miller, 2009; Polloway et al., 2004):

    e    Writing Fluency: Indices of writing fluency, which involves the number of words and variety of
         sentence complexity in a piece of writing, include:
              o    Word fluency: Determined by dividing the total number of words by number of sentences
                    in the text.

              o    Variety of sentence styles: Determined by counting the number of sentence fragments,
                   simple sentences, complex sentences, compound               sentences, and complex-compound
                   sentences.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-13
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                 ASSESSMENT — Writing



              o    Sentence complexity: Determined by first counting the number of declarative, imperative,
                   interrogative, and exclamatory sentences and then calculating a ratio of each sentence
                   type compared to other sentence types.

         Vocabulary: Determined by calculating a type-token ratio in which the type, or number of
         different words used in a text of a predetermined number of words (e.g., 50 or 100 words; must
         remain constant across samples) is divided by the token, or total number of words in the text.

         Structure and Organization: Determined by qualitative evaluation. Structure is based ona
         student’s knowledge and application of grammatical dexterity (i.e., the application of different
         grammatical structures) and punctuation. Organization focuses on two elements: (a) clarity and
         logic of the text, and (b) content.

         Content: Determined by a qualitative evaluation. Evaluation of the content of a written product
         can be conducted by posing more specific questions, such as:

              o    Is the content of the written product relevant to the topic or assignment?

              o    Does the content of the written text reflect the writer’s original thinking?

              o    Does the content of the written product reflect the writer’s own ideas and perspectives or
                   does it rely primarily on the opinions of others?

              o    Is the content presented clearly (i.e., in a clear, logical manner that is easy to follow)?

              o    Does the written product reflect the writer’s interest in the topic?

    Although no criterion for the above four indices exists, each index can be used for scoring to obtain
information about students’ level of writing sophistication (e.g., more sophisticated writers are likely to use
more diverse vocabulary in longer and more complex sentences).

Recommendations for Implementation

    Although the nascent state of W-CBM           research and development means that specific research-based
administration guidelines and “ready to use” assessments are not directly available, standard CBM
administration practices may still be applied.

    v¥   Formative assessment administration procedures should specify a time limit when quantitative
         scoring approaches will be used to score productivity writing samples. For example, probe
         administration is recommended         between    1 to 3 minutes in the early elementary grades and 3 to 5
         minutes in the later elementary grades. Planning time for elementary grade probes is often
         around 30-seconds. Probe administration for intermediate and secondary levels is between 5 and
         10-minutes with 3-minutes for planning time.

         When monitoring progress in fluency and productivity, measures can be administered on a
         weekly or biweekly basis (i.e., probes might alternate genre each week -- Week                 1-argument,
         Week 2-explanatory, Week 3-arugment) to all students in the bottom 25% of the class, or align
         with instruction focused on a specific genre. For example, during an 8-week instructional unit on
         argument, weekly or biweekly progress monitoring with probes would align with the argument
         genre. During a subsequent unit on narrative writing, progress monitoring probes would focus on
         the narrative genre.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-14
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



    ¥    Students’ performance on progress-monitoring measures can be used to set individual goals and
         aimlines (i.e., individual-referenced evaluation) and should be graphed for visual monitoring of
         student progress (Olinghouse, 2009).

    Y    Quantitative scoring approaches should align with instructional objectives and be used to score
         formative assessment probes for fluency and productivity. Note that multiple scoring approaches
         can be applied to a single probe. For example, an elementary grade writing probe might be
         scored for total words written, correct word sequences, and number of taught vocabulary words
         used from the most recent unit of instruction. Overall, determining which quantitative scoring
         approach/approaches to use is a decision that aligns with goals and instruction.

    Before discussing qualitative scoring procedures, it’s important to reinforce the purpose of
quantitative scoring. The purpose of obtaining a quantitative score is to determine how fluently and
productively students write. Similar to the use of oral reading fluency in reading assessment,
quantitative writing scores can also serve as a general indicator of student writing performance.
Of course quantitative scores don’t tell everything about student writing, but quantitative scores based on
CWS, spelling, vocabulary, and sentence complexity, for example, can provide time-efficient insight into a
student’s overall writing skills. Overall, quantitative scores provide information about fluency, writing
productivity, and are suggestive of a student’s general writing skills.

    Finally, to obtain a score that meaningfully reflects writing fluency, productivity, and a time-
efficient “snapshot” of student writing performance,                timed writing samples are required.
Therefore, fluency and productivity are evaluated through the use of timed probes (e.g., score what a
student wrote in 3-minutes, 5-minutes, etc.).


Score Writing Probes with Qualitative, Instructionally-Aligned Rubrics
    Qualitative scoring complements quantitative scoring. The use of qualitative scoring provides an
opportunity to examine the overall quality of a writing sample.                 For example, questions such as what
is the content like, how well do students include the critical points of an argument, does the writing
sample have effective style and tone, and how well is the writing organized can be answered with
qualitative scoring procedures. Qualitative scoring examines a complete writing sample (versus the
first 2-minute or 3-minute snapshot). Probes are still used for assessment and students respond to a
writing prompt. Student writing, however, doesn’t stop after the fluency-productivity time limit. Students
keep writing and complete a composition within a reasonable, pre-determined time (e.g., class period, 45-
minutes, 1-hour). In other words, quantitative scoring is applied to whatever students complete
within the specified time for fluency and productivity. Qualitative scoring is applied to a whole
composition.

    Before discussing how formative assessment can be used with both quantitative and qualitative
scoring procedures, qualitative scoring will be discussed in more detail.

    Qualitative scores are derived through the use of rubrics. A rubric is a “document that articulates
the expectations for an assignment by listing the criteria, or what counts, and describing levels of quality
from excellent to poor” (Andrade, et al., 2008). In addition to providing guidance for creating and
examining the quality of work, rubrics are becoming an increasingly popular means for communicating
expectations about an assignment and progress and feedback to students as well as evaluating final
projects (Andrade, et al., 2008; Rezaei & Lovorn, 2010).




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-15
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



    There are three types of qualitative scoring approaches that use rubrics to specify scoring criteria.
Each has advantages and limitations.


Holistic Scoring

    Holistic scoring, applied in the form of rubrics to large-scale, writing tests (e.g., writing scored as a
level 1, 2, 3, or 4) but also used in the classroom setting, reflects a rater’s overall impression of a
students’ composition compared to other students in a group. The rating is based on a number of
general writing characteristics, such as sentence structure, grammar, word choice, organization, and
content, with no one characteristic being given more (or less) weight than the others (Huot, 1990;
Olinghouse, 2009). An example of a holistic scoring rubric is provided below.


                                                  Holistic Scoring Rubric

         1.   Inadequate                                          2.   Needs Improvement

              e    Ideas are poorly communicated                       e    Poor organization of ideas
              e    Frequent usage errors (Such as                      e    Frequent usage errors (Such as
                   agreement, pronoun misuse, tense)                        agreement, pronoun, misuse, tense)

              e    Incorrect or erratic use of                         e    Inconsistent use of capitalization,
                   capitalization, punctuation, and                         punctuation, and spelling conventions

                   spelling conventions                                e    Sentence fragments and run-ons, few
              e    Sentence fragments and run-ons,                          complete sentences
                   few compete sentences                               e    Poor topic sentence; flawed paragraph
              e    Noconcept of paragraph                                   development
                   construction

         3.   Acceptable                                          4.   Meets Expectations
                   Ideas sufficiently organized and                         Ideas clearly communicated and of a
                   communicated                                             fairly mature quality

                   Only occasional usage errors (Such                       No usage errors
                   as agreement, pronoun misuse,
                                                                            Correct capitalization, punctuation, and
                   tense)
                                                                            spelling
                   Minimal   number of sentence      errors
                                                                            No fragments or run-ons
                   (fragment or run-ons)
                                                                            Effective paragraph construction
                   Paragraphs have topic sentences,
                   supporting ideas, and closing
                   sentences
                   Some attempt at paragraph transition

    NOTE: A paper that is illegible, off the point, or non-response if scored 0.

    * Adapted from Division of Curriculum and Instruction, Department of Elementary and Secondary Education, Milwaukee Public
    Schools, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Cited in Shapiro (2004).



OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                              WA-16
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



    Advantages:      Holistic scoring is a time-efficient, practical scoring method that obtains a single score
for e ach student. Practice in writing papers that will be holistically scored is particularly important for
middle and high school students as they work toward college and career-readiness. That is because
holistic scoring is commonly used in colleges and in writing assessments administered to job applicants. It
is also the scoring method use for the ACT, SAT II, and the NAEP Writing Assessment. As students move
through school, being able to write an essay that will be scored holistically, employing the characteristics
of effective writing that work together to have the desired effect on the reader, is an important skill.
    Holistic scores also place students in a particular group for comparison purposes (e.g., state, district,
school, classroom, subject area, etc.). It is      a useful way to gauge how a student’s writing compares to the
writing of a reference group. This information can be used for instructional purposes. For example,
students who are in the bottom 25% compared to other students could be seriously considered for tier 2
or 3 writing supports in schools that use a multi-tiered approach to service delivery.

    Limitations: Although many large scale assessment systems rely on holistic scoring because it is
faster, more efficient, and can be used to make local, normative comparisons (Olinghouse, 2009; Weigle,
2007), one important limitation is that holistic rubrics do not offer trait-specific diagnostic information to the
student to help focus efforts (Miller & Crocker, 1990).

    Also, holistic scoring should be used cautiously with certain groups of students, such as ELs, for
several reasons. The primary concern is that certain structural aspects of writing including syntax and
grammar may be less developed for ELs compared to native English speakers. If the focus of the
assessment is on the ideas in the writing sample, which is frequently the case with holistic scoring
methods, it is important to not let other factors, such as syntax and grammar, influence the rating. It is not
uncommon, for instance, for an EL student to be an accurate writer who lacks fluency, or a writer who
demonstrates a command of English vocabulary, but has difficulty with syntactic control (Hamp-Lyons,
1996). The issue with making sure the scoring focus stays on the dimension under consideration is not a
problem unique to holistic scoring methods. First, because holistic rubrics rely on a single outcome score,
they do not offer the diagnostic feedback and correction that ELs may need to learn about their writing
performance. Second,       holistic rubrics may not consider that ELs are learning to write in a second
language which often means different components of writing skill develop at different rates. Lastly, it has
been argued that holistic scoring obscures an overemphasis or under-emphasis on basic language
control and may not consider the multidimensionality of EL students’ writing in which language control is
only one component among          many others to be considered and evaluated (Hamp-Lyons,                 1996).



Primary Trait Scoring

Primary trait scoring focuses on specific characteristics of writing (Huot, 1990; Olinghouse, 2009).
This scoring is discourse-defined and scores the writing according to purpose or audience.
Evaluation criteria will be different for each type of discourse (e.g., argument, explanatory, narrative). lf a
writing prompt asked students to write a narrative, for example, a primary trait scoring approach might
focus on the characteristics that are specific to that particular genre of writing (e.g., theme, setting,
characters, plot, etc.). Primary trait scoring can also focus narrowly on one aspect of writing such as
character development, organization and cohesion, style, or using data to support an argument.

    The examples below illustrate how primary trait scoring can be used to evaluate science
writing, argument writing, and the use of creative characters in narrative writing. Notice how the
primary trait rubrics for science and argument writing define critical features for science- and argument-



OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-17
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                         ASSESSMENT — Writing



discourse. The primary trait rubric for creative characters, however, is an example of a more narrowly
defined trait (e.g., creative characters). More narrowly-defined primary trait rubrics might be used when
instructional objectives emphasize a particular aspect of student writing for improvement or overall
enhancement.



                                                   Primary Trait Scoring Rubric
                                                        Integrative Science

                                                       Basic Concepts
                             Science and              and Fundamental                Scientific                   Nature of
   Scoring Level               Society                    Principles                 Approach                      Science

 4-Accomplished         | Develops and                Integrates and           Demonstrates                  Demonstrates
                          defends an                  applies basic            comprehension of              scientific
                          informed position, | scientific concepts          | the scientific                 reasoning across
                          integrating                 and principles.          approach; illustrates       | multiple
                          values, science,                                     with examples.                disciplines.
                          and technology.

 3-Competent              Correctly                   Shows clear              Accurately                    Interprets and
                          describes                   comprehension of         expresses concepts            relates scientific
                          perspectives                basic scientific         relating to the               results in a way
                          concerning the              concepts and             scientific approach.          that shows a clear
                          scientific aspects        | principles.                                            recognition of the
                          of a societal                                                                      nature of science.
                          issue.

 2-Developing             Recognizes the              Able to state basic    | Uses vocabulary               Provides simplistic
                          place of science            scientific concepts   | related to scientific          or incomplete
                          in human affairs,         | and principles.          methods in a rote             explanations of
                          but is unable to                                     manner or showing             the nature of
                          communicate its                                      simple                        science.
                          roles.                                               conceptualization.

 1-Beginning              Does not              Lacks                          Shows minimal                 Does not
                          visualize a role or | understanding of               understanding of              distinguish
                          need for science            basic scientific         scientific methods.           between scientific,
                          in human      affairs.      concepts and                                           political, religious,
                                                      principles.                                            or ethical
                                                                                                             statements.

 Domain Total

 Overall
 Total Score

 *California State University, Fresno. http//www.csufresno.edu/cetl/assessment (Click IBScoring.doc)




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                                   Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework —        Writing                        WA-18
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                             ASSESSMENT — Writing




                                              Primary Trait Scoring Rubric
                                                           Argument Writing

 Components                     4                      3                       2                         1         Total

 Focus               The writer             The writerhas         | The writerhas          | The writer does
                     clearly states         an opening              written an                not express an
                     an opening             sentence,               opinion.                  opinion.
                     sentence,              which includes
                     which captures | an opinion.
                     the reader’s
                     attention and
                     includes an
                     opinion.

 Development | The writer                   The writer              The writer                The writer
                     clearly states         clearly states          clearly states            states reasons
                     at least two           reasons with at | reasons with at | and no details.
                     supporting             least two               least one
                     details for each     | supporting              supporting
                     reason.                details for each        detail for each
                                            reason.                 reason.

 Organization        Reasons        and     Reasons         and     Reasons        and        Reasons        are
                     details are            details are             details are               expressed
                     expressed In           expressed in            expressed with          | without
                     logical order          logical order           the usage of at | transition
                     with the usage       | with the usage        | least two                 words.
                     of several             of at least             transition
                     appropriate            three                   words.
                     transition             appropriate
                     words.                 transition
                                            words.

 Conclusion          The writer             The writer              The writer                The writer does
                     clearly                restates his/her | attempts to                    not restate an
                     paraphrases            opinion.                restate an                option.
                     his/her opinion.                               opinion.

                                                                                         Overall Total Score




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                                  Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                              WA-19
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                      ASSESSMENT — Writing




                                                  Primary Trait Scoring

                                                   Creative Characters

      5             The story line has unusual characters that look and act very differently from any known
                    character.
      4             The story line has unusual characters that look or engage in somewhat unusual
                    behavior.
      3             The story line has typical characters that look somewhat different from those which are
                    expected and who engage in unusual behavior.
      2             The story line has typical characters that look somewhat unusual or are engaged                        in
                    unusual behaviors.
      1             The story line contains characters that look and act in a typical and expected manner.
 *Tindal, G. A., & Marston, D. B. (1990). Classroom-based assessment:   Evaluating instructional outcomes.   Columbus: OH: Merrill

    One advantage of primary trait scoring is that the rating provides specific information that can
be used for planning instruction or for student feedback.                  Excessive feedback or correction (i.e.,
feedback is overwhelming because there are so many areas of need in a student’s writing) can also be
avoided because a primary trait rubric focuses on one area of writing (e.g., argument, explanatory,
narrative) or aspect of writing (e.g., character development, story idea, use of examples and details). On
the other hand, a potential limitation with primary trait scoring rubrics is the somewhat restrictive
nature of the primary trait. For example, if the primary trait rubric specifies argument or character
development too narrowly, there can be undue constraints on student writing.



Analytic Trait Scoring

Analytic trait scoring is the most comprehensive because it focuses on several specific
characteristics germane to good writing and allows raters to evaluate a composition for each
characteristic independently and on different scales. Once the characteristics of good writing have
been identified,   a weighted rating scale is established. Because each writing characteristic can be
evaluated on separate scales, analytic scoring provides students and teachers with a set of scores
that provides a more comprehensive understanding of students’ writing abilities and detailed,
explicit feedback about performance             (Rezaei & Lovorn, 2010). Two examples of analytic scoring
rubrics are provided below. When         reviewing the first example, notice how different dimensions listed on
the rubric (e.g., organization, sentence structure, and usage) are weighted differently. For example, a
student’s score for organization is multiplied by six while a student’s score for mechanics is multiplied by
four. There is no “research-based” or single correct way of weighting (or not weighting) dimensions for
analytic trait scoring — how dimensions are weighted (or not weighted) depends on student goals and
overall instructional purpose.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                               Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                                     WA-20
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                    ASSESSMENT — Writing


                                                     Analytic Scoring Rubric
                                                           Example 1
                                       1              2                 3                                    5
                     Little or nothing is written.         The essay is not                    The essay is well
                     The essay is disorganized,            complete. It lacks an               organized. It has an
                     incoherent, and poorly                introduction, well-                 introduction, supporting,
       +   nat       developed. The essay                  developed body, or                  and concluding
 Organization        does not address the topic.           conclusion. The                     paragraph. There is            X6
                                                           coherence and sequence              coherence, a logical order
                                                           are attempted but not               or ideas, and fully
                                                           adequate.                           developed content.
                     The student writes                    The student makes                   The sentences are
                     frequent run-ons or                   occasional errors in                complete and varied in
   Sentence          fragments.                            sentence structure. Little          length and structure.          X5
   Structure                                               variety in sentence length
                                                           or sentence structure
                                                           exists.
                     The student makes                     The student makes                   The usage is correct.
     Usage           frequent errors in word               occasional errors in                Word choice is                 X4
                     choice and agreement.                 mechanics.                          appropriate.
                     The student makes                     The student makes an                The spelling,
              :      frequent errors in spelling,          occasional error in                 capitalization, and
  Mechanics          punctuation, and                      mechanics.                          punctuation are correct.       X4
                     capitalization.
                     The format is sloppy.                 The handwriting, margins,           The format is correct. The
                     There are no margins or               and indentations have               title is appropriate. The
     Format          indentations. Handwriting             occasional inconsistencies          handwriting, margins, and      X1
                     is inconsistent.                      — no title or inappropriate         indentations are
                                                           title.                              consistent.

                                                                                                         Overall Total
*Adams County Schoo! District #12, 11285 Highline Drive, Northgleen, Colorado 80203. Cited in Shapiro (2004).




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                                 Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                               WA-21
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                                                                       ASSESSMENT — Writing




                                                                                  Example 2

                                                          Oregon Department of Education
                                                     Writing Student Language Scoring Guides



          Working Draft                                                                                                                                            2008-2009

                                    Student Language Scoring Guide: Grade 4 Condensed Version
                   5/6:   STRONG                    4: GETS
                                                         THE JOB DONE                             3:       ALMOST      THERE                    2/1:   NEEDS WORK
         The paper is usually longer, and | The paper is long enough to      The paper is not long enough, or | The paper is much too short, or
         it shows strong writing skills.    show what 4* Graders should be | it has some problems.              it has problems.
                                                   ableto do.
          5/6 IDEAS: STRONG                        4 IDEAS: GETS       THE JOB DONE | 3 IDEAS: ALMOST THERE                             2/1 IDEAS:    NEEDS WORK
              = Mam ideas are interestingand          = Whiter’s purpose and main           Whiter’s purpose and mam                        = Purpose  and maim ideas are
                easy to understand.                       ideas are easy to understand.     ideas are easy to understand.                     not easy to understand. The
              = Many strong, specific
                                    details           = There are enough details to      = There may not be enough                            reader may have to guess at

             =   The details are on the topic.        =   Most of the details
                                                                            are               =        The details may be too general       =    The paper may be much too

             =   Details are good choices for         =   Most details are on the topic.                                                    =    Details may be off the topic.
                 the purpose and the reader.          =   Most details are explamed.          =        Details  may be listed but not       =    The same details  may be
             =   The wnter shares new                 =   The writer may share    new                  explained.                                repeated over and over.
                             :                                            _                                                                             —

         5/6 ORGANIZATION: STRONG | 4 ORGANIZATION:                                        3 ORGANIZATION:                              2/1 ORGANIZATION:
               The reader can follow the    GETS THE JOB DONE                                  f   OST THERE                                 NEEDS WORK
               wmiting easily. The order of = The reader can follow the                       = The reader can follow most of               = The reader has a hard time

                        makes the
             = The beginning                              and details makes sense.                     not clear.                                           Ideas and
                                                                                                                                                 often confused.
                 reader want to keep reading.         =   The beginning
                                                                   is at least a              =        Some details may not be m the             details are not in an order that
             =   The ending seems like a really           few sentences                                night place.                              makes sense.
                 good one.                            =   The ending is at least a few        =    The beginning  may be short.             =    The beginning
                                                                                                                                                          may not be
             =   Connecting   words and groups            sentences long.                     =    The ending may be too short.
                 of words make the wnting             .            ing words  and groups      =    The same          ing words              =    The ending may not be there.
                 easy to follow from one part to          of words help the reader to              may be used too often (and,              .              breaks may not be

             =   Paragraph breaks are im places       =   Paragraph
                                                              breaks are there.               =    Some paragraph
                                                                                                            breaks may be                   =    The paper may be much too
                 that make sense.                                                                  there.                                        short to show organization.
          5/6 VOICE: STRONG                        4 VOICE: GETS THE JOB DONE              3 VOICE: ALMOST THERE                        2/1 VOICE: NEEDS WORK
              . The wniter seems to be very              The wniter seems interestedin        = The wniter seems interestednm               =    The wnter does not seem to
                                                          the topic.                            the topic sometimes,  but not                    be interested
                                                                                                                                                             in the topic.
             .   The reader may feel a ;              =   The reader may get some                most of the time.                          =    The wntng seems lifeless.
                                                          senseof the wniter.                 = The paper may not be long
                                                                                                enough for the reader to see
                                                                                                       enough   of the wmiter’s
                                                                                                                            voice.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                                                    Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework —                                Writing                                     WA-22
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                                                                                     ASSESSMENT — Writing



Grade 7


          Working          Draft                                                                                                                                                             2008-2009

                             Student Language Scoring Guide: Grade 7 Condensed Bulleted Topic Version
                        5/6; STRONG
          The paper is usually longer and more
                                                                             4: SOLID
                                                              The paper is long enough to show
                                                                                                                           ALMOST THERE
                                                                                                        what | The paper is not long enough, or it has
                                                                                                                                                                        2:                  [ORK
                                                                                                                                                                The paper is much too short, or it has
          complex. It shows strong writing skills.            77* Graders should be able to do.                some problems.                                   significant problems.
          5/6 IDEAS: STRONG                                   4 IDEAS: SOLID                                   3 IDEAS: ALMOST THERE                            2/1 IDEAS:
                                                                                                                                                                       NEEDS WORK
            ~ Main ideas: interesting, stand out,               ~ Pumese and main ideas: clear:                    ~ Pumose and main ideas: clear, easy to        ~ Purpose and main idegs: not very
          focused                                             focused; easy to understand                      understand                                       clear; the reader may have to guess at
            * Supportins details:                               * Supporting details:                              * Supporine details:                         what they are
                =  many strong, rich, specific details              =   enough to explain the main ideas               =   may not be enough to explain the       + Supporting details:
                    explain the main ideas                          =    most  are specific                                 main ideas                               = paper may be much too short,
                =  focused, balanced, thorough,                     =   most are focused and related to                =   may be too general (not specific)             without enough ideas or details
                    in-depth                                             the maim ideas; on the topic                  =   some may be off the topic                 = may be off the topic
               =   seem carefully   chosen for                      =   most details   are explained                   .    may not be explained (list events        =   may be repeated  over and over
                    audience and purpose                            =   show some awarenessof                               Or points without                        = may not be understandable    to the
            - Whiter shares new understandings                           audience and purpose                          =   may sound too much like another                Teader
            ~ Outside resources, if used: provide               *                                        v                  story
                                                                                                                              or movie
          strong, accurate, believable details                  + Outside resources. if used: provide              = Outside resources.
                                                                                                                                 if used: provide
            ~ Waiting holds the reader's attention            accurate ideas and supporting details            questionable
                                                                                                                     ideas or details
          5/6 ORGANIZATION:                                   4 ORGANIZATION: SOLID                            3     ORGANIZATION:                              2/1 ORGANIZATION:
               STRONG                                                                                              ALMOST THERE                                         NEEDS WORK
            + Reader can follow the writing easily:             ~ The reader can follow the woitne                 + The reader can follow most of the            + The reader has a hard time following
          the order of ideas and details works well           ideas and details are placed in an order         writing. but some parts may be a little          the writing: may be confused often; ideas
            + Beginning:inviting; makes the reader | that makes sense                            unclear. some ideas or details may seem                        and details are not in an order that makes
          want to keep reading                         ~ Beginning: enough to make up at least | out of place or out of order                                   sense
             + Ending: seems like a good one;                 one short paragraph                                  + Beginning: too short or too obvious         + Beginning: may not be there, or is
          satisfying for the reader                              ~ Ending: enough to make up at least              ~ Ending” too short or too obvious           muuch
                                                                                                                                                                    too short
            * Connecting words, phrases, and                  one short paragraph                                  -           ing   words and       > same       + Ending may not be there, or is much
          sentences: make the writing easy to follow | ~* Commectine   words and phrases: help | ones may be used too often (amd, so, but, | too short
          from one part to the next                   the reader follow from one part to the next | then): points may be numbered               + Body: may not be there, or is much too
            + Paragraph breaks: there in places that            ~ Paragraph breaks: are there                      ~ Paragraph breaks: some may be there,
          make the most sense                                   » Otzanizaion
                                                              (such as the    may follow a fonuula             but maywneenot
                                                                                                               most         be in places that make the            : Paragraph breaks:
                                                                                                                                                                              breaks: may
                                                                                                                                                                                      may not be there

          5/6 VOICE: STRONG                                   4 VOICE: SOLID                                   3 VOICE:              ALMOST      THERE          2/1 VOICE:         NEEDS       WORK
             - Commitment to topic: writer seems                ~ Cormmtment     to topic      wiser seems       = Commitment to topic: writer seems              + Commitment    to topic: writer does not
          very interested and very committed                           and c                d to the topic     somewhat interested in the topic                 seem interested in the topic or involved
            ~ Appropriateness of voice. considering       ~ Appropriateness of voice, considering                  ~ Approprimeness of voice, considering       with the reader
              i     n             : Very appropriate; | audience and purpose: a voice is present:                                     : Rot appropriate            .                                "
          writer is personal or more objective                the writing is personal enough or                mouch of the time; too personaland not           audienceand purpose: the writing
                                                                                                                                                                                               may
             -                                                objective enough most of the time                objective enough or not personal enough          seem lifeless
                                                                                                                                                                            and flat
          with writer                                           * Other indications: when appropiate,              ~ Paper may not be lonz enough to show
            -       indications:    very sincere, lively,   | writing is sincere, lively, expressive,          the ability to maintain an appropriate
                                                                                                                                                  voice
          exciting, suspenseful, expressive,                  engaging, funny




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                                                                Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework —                                       Writing                                       WA-23
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                                                                                   ASSESSMENT — Writing




High School

        Working Draft                                                                                                                                                                         2008-2009
                                          Student Language Scoring Guide: High School Condensed Version
                   5/6: STRONG                                         4: SOLID                          3: ALMOST THERE                                                2/1; NEEDS WORK
        The paper is usually longer and more            | The paper is long enough to show what | The paper is not long enough, orithas                        | The paper is much too short, or it has
        complex    It shows strong writing skills.       | 10” Graders      should be able to do.           some         problems.                               significant problems.

        5/6 IDEAS: STRONG                                 4    IDEAS: SOLID                                 3    IDEAS:              ALMOST    THERE             2/1 IDEAS:
                                                                                                                                                                        NEEDS WORK
           ~ Pumose and main ideas: interesting,            ~ Pumese and main ideas: clear.                   ~ Pumose and main idess: clear, easy to               ~ Purpose and main ideas not very
        stand out; clear and focused                      focused, easy to understand                       understand                                           clear; reader may have to guess at what

             =    many strong, rich, specific details              .   enough to develop main ideas                  =    may not be enough to develop the         * Supporting details:
                  —                                                =    mostare specific                                   ideas                                      =   paper may be much too short,
                                                                   =   most are focused and related to               =    may be too general (not specific)               without enough ideas or details
             .    talenred tn dog, focused                             the main ideas; on the topic                  =     some may be off the topic                  =   may be off the topic
             =    seem carefully
                            chosen for                             =   most are explained
                                                                                    or developed                                                                      =   may be repeated
                                                                                                                                                                                     over and over
                  audience and purpose                             =   show some awarenessof                               OF points without explanation)             =   may not be understandable
          + Wmiter shares new understandings                           audience   and purpose                        =    may   sound too mmch like another
          ~ Outside resources, if used: provide               “Ma                                     j                    story
                                                                                                                             or movie
        strong, accurate, believable details —               + Outside resources. if used: provide           + Outside resources. if used: provide
           -                                              accurate ideas and supporting details             questionableideas or details

        5/6 ORGANIZATION:                                 4    ORGANIZATION:                                3    ORGANIZATION:                                   2/1 ORGANIZATION:
          ‘2
             STRONG
                i   follow t              <
                                                               SOLID,
                                                              ‘2        follow t                -
                                                                                                                 ALMOST
                                                                                                                -Z   ,
                                                                                                                         THERE
                                                                                                                          follow 2                -                ‘2
                                                                                                                                                                      NEEDS
                                                                                                                                                                         jet}
                                                                                                                                                                              WORK
                                                                                                                                                                               hard time follow:
        easily; ideas and details are placed in an        ideas and details are placed in an order          of the time. but some parts may be a little          the writing and may be confused
                                                                                                                                                                                              often:
        order that moves the reader nght along            that makes sense                                  waclear, some ideas and details may be               ideas and details are not im an order that
           - Beginning: inviting, makes the reader           ~ Beginning:  can be identified; enough      | placed where they do not make the most               makes sense
        want to keep reading                              to make up at least one paragraph                 sense; some may seem out of place                      * Becinning:   may not be there, or is
           + Ending: satisfying                              ~ Ending: can be identified; enough to           + Beginning: too short or too obvious              muuch too short
          » Connecting words and phrases:                 make up at least one paragraph                        ~ Ending: too short or too obvious                 ~ Ending: may not be there. or is much
        smooth; effective; make the writing easy              * Connecting words and phrases: help                               words and            : same     too short
        to follow from one part to the next               the reader follow from one part to the next | ones may be used too often (and, so, but,                  * Body: may not be there, or is much too
          ~ Paragraph breaks: used effectively                ~ Paragraphbreaks: are there: helpful =| them); points may be numbered
          ~ Wiitins may follow a forms, butitis |             - Wiitne may follows fommula (suchas | ~ Parastaph breaks: some may be there                         » Patacraph breaks: may not be there
        graceful, skillful, and subtle                    the classic “five-paragraph
                                                                                 essay”)
        5/6 VOICE: STRONG                                 4 VOICE:            SOLID                         3    VOICE:              ALMOST     THERE            2/1 VOICE: NEEDS WORK
          ~ Command to topic: the writer seems              + Commitment
                                                                     to topic: the writer seems               = Commitmentto topic: the writer seems                + Commitment to topic:  the writer does
        very committed                                    committed                                         somewhat committed                                   not seem interested in the topic or
          ~ Appropriateness
                   of voice, considering                                                                        ~ Appropriateness
                                                                                                                         of voice. considering                   involved with the reader
                                                                                                                                                                    “3       -          _            ‘deri
        topic, audience, purpose: very appropriate:       audience and pummose: a voice is present;                                ; Rot appropriate
        Writer is personal or more objective              the writing is personal     enough or             mouch of the time; too personal  and not             guadience
                                                                                                                                                                        and purpose: the writing
                                                                                                                                                                                               may
           ~ indications:
             Other             very sincere, lively,      objective enough most of the time                 objective enough or not personal enough              seem lifeless
                                                                                                                                                                            and flat


                                                          — eee
        exciting, suspenseful, expressive, funny           + Other indications: when appropriate,               ~ Paper may not be lone enough to show
           + Reader   may feel a strong commection                                                          the ability to maintam an appropriate
                                                                                                                                              voice
        with writer




“Oregon Department of Education. Writing Student Language Scoring Guides. http.//www.ode.state. or.us/search/page/?=2346




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                                                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework —                                      Writing                                       WA-24
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                                                         ASSESSMENT — Writing



    Also note that Oregon’s Official Scoring Guide is an analytic trait scoring system (see
http://www.ode.state.or.us/wma/teachlearn/testing/scoring/quides/2009-10/asmtwriscorquide0910eng.pdf
to review the OAKS Scoring Guide).
    The next example illustrates how analytic scores can be graphed for individual students. Notice the
teacher’s notes at the top of the graph to indicate instructional unit and emphasis of instruction (e.g., new
think sheet, new edits). Even though the graph below illustrates analytic scores, the same type of
graphing system could also be used with primary trait scores.



                                        Classroom Graph of Student Analytical Scores


                   Analytical Scores (Organization, accuracy, eee                                                                pta x),
                                                                                                                                         *

                   Notes:                sSy               wl
                                                           ws
                                                                             ee
                                                                              ee
                                                                              a
                                                                                              ov
                                                                                              =
                                                                                                     Nateae‘                    3%
                                                                                                                                 S
                                           c-                tad                      ya Bg                    v                   | ie
                                     S$
                                     S
                                                           Ros
                                                             = ¢
                                                                                ee
                                                                                + Og
                                                                                                             ae
                                                                                                            & =
                                                                                                                                  cu
                                                                                                                                 » $3
                            Week 12                   Week 2                 Week 3                Week 4                   Week 5
                            MTWTFMTWTFMTWTE                                   MITWTF MTWTE
                            12 12 12 12 12]12 12 12 12 12]1212 12 12 12[12/12 12 12 12|}2 12 12 12 12
                            44.1444 Be AVft1 4140-414«-19«-19490 10 41014-14741 411      Oe MS
                            10 10 10 AO'0}10 10 10 10 10]40 10 10 10 10]10|m 10 W 10]10 #710 10 10
                              999/9        N99 P98 91/19           9 9 9 8] 919        9 8 VI]/9 9 9 9 9
                              86 és 8]\s 8/8 * 8]\8 8 8 8 8] 88 8 B 81/8 6 & B 8
                             7 Ay ae a ale AE Sed Sr le Gi ay ei aa IR Ala at Wd Mec ae Me a ical ea Ai
                              666 6 6|6             f aelaee          A         66     6 6 6/|6 6 6 6 6
                             §    §'5''§        S'S        5' &     6   SS        ©              6 6515
                                                                                            6 96)'515   6 6 5S
                             AA      Wich                  OA      oe   4b A            4, O40      414     44            41 4           a
                            91:8)    8-8        Sit    2   59)     SO   Sl   aS        |S   BiGie.8         2 iS          SI BS)         3   8 8
                            D9     BS      SOTO 188) Oo 208                    2) 2 28
                                                                                  2         2               22)           2rihia         2   2 ie
                            Bie ome ea ells ial is, HINIE saiec GE Mg Se ae A  >   ae A A le i I                      a    WG       Si
                            0: 30'-0.10'0'b:0.0: 0                  0: 0) 0:0'.0:0-0),0     0 0                   0       010      09        8   9




“Isaacson (1999). Instructionally relevant writing assessment. Reading and Writing Quarterly, 29-48.


    While there are advantages to an analytic scoring approach with separate evaluation of specific
writing characteristics, the time spent reviewing each characteristic can make use of an analytic trait
scoring approach time-consuming. The following directions have been used to guide analytic trait scoring.
Note the deliberate focus on one writing dimension at a time during scoring. Also notice that there is
a recommended        “pause” in the scoring process before writing samples are reviewed on another
dimension.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                                              WA-25
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                        ASSESSMENT — Writing



                                                  Analytic Scoring Directions

1.   Review the entire scoring rubric.

2.   Re-read the scoring rubric focusing on only one dimension.

3.   Read the entire selection of student writing samples.

4.   Begin scoring writing samples according to the chosen dimension. Try to spend only 1 to 2 minutes
     per writing sample. Place writing samples in piles based on the score each sample receives on the
     chosen dimension. Refer to rating criteria and piles of writing samples frequently during the scoring
     process.
5.   Go back through piles and adjust samples that belong in different piles.

6.   Record scores on record/data sheet.

7.   Allow enough time to pass so you don’t remember the writing samples’ scores (to the greatest extent
     possible). Shuffle the pile of writing samples and score on the next dimension.

*Jenizsch, C., &Tindal, G. (1991). Research, consultation, and Teaching program training module no. 8: Analytic scoring of writing.
Eugene, OR: University of Oregon College of Education, Behavioral Research and Teaching.



    Finally, an analytic scoring rubric can be developed to align with the Common Core State
Standards (CCSS) for Writing and might include the following components:
     e    Content, ideas, and organization

          o    CCSS for ELA and Literacy, Writing Standards 1-3
     e    "Effective choices for meaning or style” (e.g., sentence complexity, use of vocabulary,
          authenticity)

          o    CCSS for ELA and Literacy, Language Standards 3-6
     e    Mastery of writing conventions and mechanics (e.g., spelling, gfammar, punctuation, etc.)

          o    see CCSS for ELA and Literacy, Language Standard 2.


Qualitative Hybrid Rubrics

     The strongest and most amenable approaches to diagnostic evaluation, formative
assessment, and instructional development are the use of analytic and/or primary-trait scoring.
Because analytic and primary-trait scoring are the most versatile and instructionally-useful scoring
approaches, often rubrics will be created to address a primary trait feature, such as a form of written
discourse (e.g., argument, narrative) and include dimensions reflective of overall writing quality (e.g.,
conventions, mechanics, organization). Notice how the Primary Trait rubric below focuses on the domain
of Argument Writing but also incorporates an analytic dimension (e.g., mechanics). Because the analytic
dimension of mechanics was added to this rubric, the rubric becomes a hybrid with both primary trait and
analytic components.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                                 Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                                 WA-26
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                     ASSESSMENT — Writing



                                         Hybrid Rubric — Primary Trait and Analytic
                                                     Argument Writing

Components                     4                    3                     2                     1          Total

Focus                The writer             The writer has     | The writerhas       | The writer does
                     clearly states         an opening           written an            not express an
                     an opening             sentence,            opinion.              opinion.
                     sentence,              which includes
                     which captures | an opinion.
                     the reader’s
                     attention and
                     includes an
                     opinion.

Development       | The writer              The writer           The writer             The writer
                     clearly states         clearly states    clearly states    states reasons
                     at least two           reasons with at | reasons with at | and no details.
                     supporting             least two         least one
                     details for each     | supporting        supporting
                     reason.                details for each  detail for each
                                            reason.           reason.

Organization         Reasons       and      Reasons      and     Reasons      and       Reasons      are
                     details are            details are          details are       expressed
                     expressed in           expressed In         expressed with | without
                     logical order          logical order        the usage of at | transition
                     with the usage       | with the usage     | least two         words.
                     of several             of at least three | transition
                     appropriate            appropriate          words.
                     transition             transition
                     words.                 words.

Conclusion           The writer             The writer         The writer               The writer does
                     clearly                restates his/her | attempts to              not restate an
                     paraphrases            opinion.           restate an               option.
                     his/her opinion.                          opinion.

Mechanics            The writer uses       | The writer uses | The writer uses        | The writer does
                     a variety of           a variety of         little variety of      not use a
                     sentences,             sentences.           sentences.             variety of
                     which flow             There are no         There are not          sentences.
                     smoothly.              more than            more than four | There are
                     There are no           three errors in      errors in              several errors
                     errors in              grammar,             grammar,               in grammar,
                     grammar,               punctuation,         punctuation,           punctuation,
                     punctuation,           capitalization,      capitalization         capitalization,
                     capitalization,        and spelling.        and spelling.          and spelling.
                     and spelling.

                                                                                     Overall Total Score




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                               Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                           WA-27
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                 ASSESSMENT — Writing



      Another example of a rubric that includes both primary trait and analytic components is provided
below. Notice how primary trait scoring focuses on the critical features of summary writing and analytic
scoring focuses on writing conventions.


                                       Hybrid Rubric — Primary Trait and Analytic
                                                Summary Writing Rubric
                          Content of Summary                                 Student Rating           Teacher Rating

 1.    Topic: Is the topic of the original article stated?                      0           1            0            1

 2.    Main Idea/Opinion: Is the main idea of the article (or                   0           1            0            1
       author's position) clearly stated?

 3.    Major Points/Reasons: Does the summary focus on                          0           1            0            1
       the major points, reasons, and/or information from the
       article?

 4.    Accurate: Are the major points, reasons, and/or                          0           1            0            1
       information accurate?

 5.    Own Words:        Is the summary written in your own                     0           1            0            1
       words?

 6.    Concise:     Is the summary shorter than the original                    0           1            0            1
       article?

 7.    Combined Ideas: Are some of the ideas combined into                      0           1            0            1
       longer, more sophisticated sentences?

 8.    Understanding:           Is the summary easy to understand?              0           1            0            1

                                                     Summary Total                  /8                       /8

                          Writing Conventions                                Student Rating           Teacher Rating

 1.    Handwriting: Is the handwriting legible?                                 0           1            0            1

 2.    Spelling: Are words spelled correctly, particularly                      0           1            0            1
       words found in the article?

 3.    Capitalization: Is correct capitalization used, including                0           1            0            1
       capitalization of the first word in sentences and proper
       names of people, places, and things?

 4.    Punctuation:       Is correct punctuation used, including a              0           1            0            1
       period at the end of each telling sentence?

                                         Writing Conventions Total       | _—s_- / 4                 __/4

                                                 Overall Total Score     | —/12                      __/12
 *Credit to Dr. Anita Archer.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                               Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                               WA-28
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



     Notice how the rubric includes a set of items that will change according to discourse (primary
trait) and a set of items that will consistently apply across writing genres (analytic). In other words,
the primary trait component of the rubric above focuses on discourse specific to summary writing.
When an instructional unit changes focus to another area of discourse (e.g., argument) the primary trait
features can be changed to align with instruction. The analytic features on the rubric, however, could
remain unchanged. That way, students become familiar with the constant features of good writing while
primary trait features change to align with different writing genres.

     The rubric above also elicits student and teacher feedback, a process that may increase students’
awareness of their own writing and the critical features of writing that are evaluated. Finally, although the
rating scale for the above rubric is dichotomous, and does not provide information regarding the degree to
which each of these components represents quality writing, the rating scale could be modified for use
with older students to include a greater response range (e.g., use a scale of 0 to 3 or 0 to 5).

     Similar rubrics could be developed to align with the CCSS for ELA and Literacy’s three text-
types — opinion/argument, informative/explanatory, and narrative texts (Writing Standards 1-3).
Writing Standard 1 for fourth grade students, for example, has the following expectations for student
performance: (a) introduces a topic or text clearly, (b) states an opinion on the topic or text, (c) utilizes an
organizational structure in which related ideas are grouped to support the writer's opinion/purpose, (d)
includes reasons that are supported by facts and details, (e) uses linking words and phrases to support
structure of written product, and (f) provides a concluding statement or section related to the opinion
presented. Each of these expectations can be translated into “kid friendly” terms and incorporated into a
rubric.



Qualitative Scoring Reliability

     Reading book reviews in the Sunday newspaper reveals the subjective nature of writing. Sometimes
the reviews for the same book will be qualitatively different with favorable and not so favorable reviews.
Even though rubrics can be designed to carefully define features of writing, qualitative scoring is still
based on reviewer subjectivity. Therefore, when using qualitative scoring, it is important to be aware of
scoring reliability and establish reliability wnen any group (e.g., screening, multi-tier intervention
decisions) or “high stakes” (e.g., a district-level writing assessment) decisions are based on the data.
There are two types of reliability.

     The first, /ntra-rater Reliability, is based on how reliable a scorer is with himself or herself. For
example, if a teacher scores a set of student writing samples with a primary trait rubric, would that teacher
score the student writing samples the same way if, theoretically speaking, the teacher re-scored all the
writing samples with the same primary trait rubric         a second time? When        using qualitative scoring, it’s
important to have awareness of intra-rater reliability and scoring consistency. While a formal process of
re-scoring work and calculating intra-reliability may not be necessary when using the data to make
instructional decisions at an individual-student level, it is still important to self-evaluate scoring with a few
samples of student work. If a formal intra-rater reliability check is desired (e.g., if one teacher is assigned
to score all of the writing samples for fifth grade screening), follow the inter-reliability procedures for
calculating reliability (See table below). Instead of comparing two different scorers, compare initial scores
with scores from a re-scoring (e.g., ensure that the same rubric and same set of writing samples are used
for the re-scoring).   Scoring can also be refined with practice and by discussing scoring rubrics and




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                              WA-29
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



scored writing samples with colleagues (e.g., grade-level team meeting, subject-area team
meeting).

    The second, /nter-rater Reliability, considers how much score agreement there is between two
scorers when they score the same writing sample. For example, are the teachers who score a middle
school writing screening, interpreting the scoring rubric similarly and scoring writing samples in a relatively
consistent way?A teacher rates a group of writing samples using a primary trait scoring rubric. After
scoring, that same teacher asks another teacher to score the same set of writing samples, using the
same primary trait scoring rubric. After the second teacher scores the writing samples, the two
teachers’ scores are compared and a percentage of agreement, a reliability coefficient, is
calculated to see how similar the teachers score the writing samples. Overall, inter-rater reliability
involves two raters independently scoring the same set of writing samples. Even though inter-rater
reliability is based on the comparison of two raters, the same process of determining reliability can be
used if multiple scorers are scoring student writing samples (e.g., determine if each individual scorer is
reliable with the other scorers). The box below outlines the process for establishing inter-rater reliability,
provides information on how to calculate reliability, and lists reliability levels to obtain, depending on
whether decisions are made at a group-level (e.g., grade-level screening, multi-tier intervention
decisions), or made within a “high stakes” context (e.g., district- level writing assessment).



                                        Inter-rater Reliability Procedures

 Procedures

 (1) Transfer Scores
 Transfer scores onto Reliability Calculation Sheet(s)

  If you want to calculate overall reliability based on total scores, you will need one reliability
 calculation sheet. List student names on the reliability calculation sheet and the total scores
 determined by scorer 1 and score 2 for each student.

  If you want to calculate reliability for each dimension or category on the rubric (e.g., organization,
 focus, character clues, etc.). Use multiple reliability calculation sheets —designating a sheet for each
 rubric dimension or scoring category. Dimension or category scores as determined by scorer 1 and
 scorer 2 for each student.

 (2) Determine the Hits and Disagreements

 If the scorers agree, there is a hit. Score a hit as “1.”       If scorers disagree by 1, score the disagreement
 as a“.5” hit. For example, if Scorer 1 gives a sample a 3 and Scorer 2 gives the same sample a 4,
 then a .5 is listed as the value of the hit. No points (“0”) are given when scores differ by more than 1
 (e.g.,   a score of 3 and a score of 5)
 (3) Tally the Number of Hits

 Tally the number of hits at the bottom of the calculation sheet in the box marked “Total Hits.”

 (4) Tally the Total Possible Hits

 Tally the number of total possible hits by counting the number of scored writing samples.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-30
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                     ASSESSMENT — Writing



                                        Inter-rater Reliability Procedures

 (5) Calculate Reliability

 Divide the total hits by the total possible hits to obtain the reliability coefficient.

 (6) Interpret Reliability Based on Decision Use

 Use the Decision Use Table below to interpret reliability based on decision use (e.g., is the purpose of
 the writing assessment related to group decisions such as screening or multi-tier interventions or
 decisions such as a district-level assessment?).

                                                       Decisions      Use

   Reliability Coefficient                   Meaning                                   Decision Use

   .80 and less                              Weak                                      Don’t use for any decisions!


   .81-.84                                   Moderate                                  Group Decisions


   .85-.90                                   Average                                   Group Decisions and High Stakes
                                                                                       Decisions

   .91-.93                                   Strong                                    High Stakes Decisions

   .94-.99                                   Almost Perfect

   (Webb, 1983)
 *Jenizsch, C., &Tindal, G. (1991). Research, consultation, and Teaching program training module no. 8: Analytic scoring of
 writing. Eugene, OR: University of Oregon College of Education, Behavioral Research and Teaching.


    The process of establishing reliability can raise important conceptual issues about how the
scoring rubric is interpreted and the quality of student writing. As a result, there are often
productive, high-level discussions about writing. Reliability scoring practice can be incorporated into
grade-level and subject-area team meetings. Teachers can also bring pre-scored writing samples to a
meeting and discussion can focus around samples where disagreements were noted.



Recommendations for Implementation

    ¥    Formative assessment administration procedures for writing samples that will be scored for
         overall quality should specify a reasonable time period for student writing sample completion
         (e.g., 30-mintes, 45-minutes, a class period). A specified amount of planning time can be
         provided and students can be prompted at the start of writing and final proofreading stages.

    v    When     progress monitoring focuses on quality, measures can be administered on a weekly or
         biweekly basis (i.e., probes might alternate genre each week—Week                     1-argument, Week 2-
         explanatory, Week 3-arugment) to all students in the bottom 25% of the class, or align with
         instruction focused on a specific genre. For example, during an 8-week instructional unit on
         argument, weekly or biweekly progress monitoring with probes would align with the argument



OREGON LITERACY PLAN                                  Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                                WA-31
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



         genre. During a subsequent unit on narrative writing, progress monitoring probes would focus on
         the narrative genre. Primary trait and/or analytic trait scoring rubrics are used to score each
         progress-monitoring assessment.

    ¥    Students’ performance on progress-monitoring measures can be used to set individual goals and
         aimlines (i.e., individual-referenced evaluation) and should be graphed for visual monitoring of
         student progress (Olinghouse, 2009).

    ¥    Qualitative-scoring approaches should align with instructional objectives and be used to score
         formative assessment probes for quality. Primary trait and/or analytic trait scoring rubrics are
         recommended.       Hybrid rubrics can be developed to address both primary trait and analytic
         dimensions of writing through the use of one rubric (versus two separate primary trait and analytic
         trait rubrics).   A school writing team can be established to develop and/or select scoring rubrics.

    v    Reliability scoring practice should be scheduled, particularly when multiple scorers will score
         student writing samples (e.g., district-level writing assessments, screening). Higher levels of
         reliability should be obtained when making “high stakes” decisions.



Formative Assessment Using Quantitative and Qualitative Scoring Approaches
    All qualitative evaluations suffer the major problem of sensitivity because a limited range of
scores is possible with the use of rating scales. For example, a primary trait scoring rubric that
focuses on five character dimensions only has a score range from 0 to 5. In other words, a 0 to 5 scale
won't reflect large increments of growth due to the limited score range. Even hybrid rubrics that consider
multiple dimensions and calculate an overall score total still have a more limited score range compared to
other forms of progress monitoring. Therefore, all qualitative evaluations should be conducted                        in
conjunction with quantitative evaluations. In addition, the use of qualitative scoring and quantitative
scoring evaluate different aspects of writing: quality and fluency/productivity.            A comprehensive K-12
writing assessment system requires the use of both quantitative and qualitative scoring for formative
assessment.

    When    using both quantitative and qualitative scoring there are a few options for screening and
progress monitoring:

    e    Separate probes can be created for productivity writing samples that will be scored quantitatively
         and full writing samples that will be scored qualitatively. In this case, a set of probes will be
         created for productivity writing samples and include directions related to the timed administration
         of the probe. If desired, students can still be directed to complete their writing, but only the
         productivity component would be scored. Another set of probes would be created with
         administration directions and procedures directing students to write a fully completed writing
         sample. The fully completed writing samples would be scored with a qualitative scoring approach
         (e.g., analytic rubric).

    e    One set of probes can be created to elicit both productivity writing and full writing samples. In this
         case, the administration directions must include procedures for students to stop a specified time
         (for fluency and productivity), mark their writing sample to indicate the last word written, and
         continue writing to complete the writing sample within a pre-determined, reasonable time period
         (e.g., 30-minitues, 45-minutes, class period). When scoring writing samples, a quantitative
         score(s) can be calculated based on the words written during the timed component of the probe,



OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                                 WA-32
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                   ASSESSMENT — Writing



                 for example (e.g., correct word sequences written during the first 3-minutes) and a qualitative
                 score can be calculated for the full writing sample using a scoring rubric.
    e        A     final option involves using a combination of the above two options. For example, perhaps one
                 set of probes, eliciting both productivity writing and full writing samples for quantitative and
                 qualitative scoring, is used for screening three to four times a year. Progress monitoring probes
                 could elicit productivity writing (for quantitative scoring only), full writing samples (for qualitative
                 scoring only), and/or both (for quantitative and qualitative scoring).

    e            Before making decisions about how to structure W-CBM probes and whether W-CBM
                 probes will include procedures for timed fluency and productivity, writing               a complete
                 essay, or both, read the Thought Box below about how “professional” writers practice.



                                                          Thought Box

        We may initially think that        a W-CBM probe, regardless of whether it is scored quantitatively or
 qualitatively, should allow students an opportunity to “complete” their writing, but many writers actually
 use informal warm-ups or short writing practice sessions for the purpose of promoting writing fluency
 and productivity. Linda Metcalf and Toby Simon (2002), for example, suggest writers use daily, 30-
 minute “Writes” to help build writing “proprioception” or an ability to seamlessly integrate ideas and
 insight in fluent writing. Julia Cameron           (1998) writes “Morning Pages” every morning. Other writers like
 Natalie Goldberg suggest that “the basic unit of writing practice is the timed exercise. [Writers] can time
 themselves for ten-minutes, twenty minutes or an hour” (Goldberg, 2010, p. 10). According to Goldberg,
 it doesn’t matter how much time a writer commits to writing practice. Rather,                what really counts during
 timed practice is a writer's commitment to writing for that specified period of time. Goldberg’s
 suggestions for timed writing practice include:

        1.        Keep your hand moving (Don't pause to reread the line you have just written. That’s stalling and
                  trying to get control of what you’re saying).

        2.        Don't cross out. (That is editing as you write. Even if you write something that you didn’t mean to
                  write, leave it).

        3.        Don't worry about spelling, punctuation, grammar. (Don’t even care about staying within the
                  margins and lines of the page).

        4.        Lose control.

        5.        Don't think. Don't get logical.

        6.        Got for the jugular. (lf something comes up in your writing that is scary. . .dive right into it. It
                  probably has lots of energy) (Goldberg, 2010, p. 10).
        While not all of Goldberg’s suggestions may necessarily be adopted for a timed W-CBM                    probe (e.g.,
 “don’t worry about spelling” will depend on whether WSC                 or CWS will be used for scoring), the spirit of
 her suggestions are important because they suggest that timed W-CBM                      probes can be administered for
 3-minutes, 5-minutes, 10-minutes, or whatever the school or class determines will be used for fluency
 and productivity scoring. In other words, if the instructional and assessment purpose is to promote
 writing fluency productivity, then a timed writing probe without the added time to “fully” complete
 the writing sample is a valid writing practice that good writers use.



OREGON LITERACY PLAN                                   Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                          WA-33
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing




                                                      Thought Box

         Therefore, when making decisions about how to structure formative assessment and whether W-
 CBM probes will include procedures for timed fluency and productivity, writing a complete essay, or
 both, consider how formative assessment can be integrated into writing instruction. Current research on
 W-CBM       doesn't provide a specified set of guidelines on how to structure probes. What is important,
 however, is the use of both quantitative and qualitative scoring procedures that are aligned with
 student goals and instruction.

    Overall, schools should determine how quantitative and qualitative scoring will be used and
how probe administration will occur (i.e., what will the directions, procedures, and format look like?).
Due to the emerging research on writing assessment, there is no single, best method for probe format
and administration. Schools and teachers, therefore, should develop probe formats and administration
procedures that work best for their site.



Recommendations for Implementation

    v¥      Grade-level appropriate W-CBM        probes for writing should be administered to all students as a
           writing screening measure three to four times per year (i.e., school- or district level norms could
           be established) and scored on quantitative and qualitative dimensions. To provide screening
           across all CCSS genres (e.g., argument, informational/explanatory, narrative) and document
           consistent progress across the school year (e.g.,         a minimum of 3 or 4 data points per student), all
           three writing genres could be assessed at each screening. For example, a screening might be
           scheduled across three weeks and could include three different writing probes, one probe for
           each genre (e.g., Week     1-argument, Week 2-informational/explanatory, Week 3-Narrative).

    ¥      Progress monitoring should be administered on a weekly or biweekly basis (i.e., probes might
           alternate genre each week -- Week 1-argument, Week 2-explanatory, Week 3-arugment) to all
           students in the bottom 25% of the class, or align with instruction focused on a specific genre. For
           example, during an 8-week instructional unit on argument, weekly or biweekly progress
           monitoring with probes would align with the argument genre. During a subsequent unit on
           narrative writing, progress monitoring probes would focus on the narrative genre. Progress
           monitoring should be scored on quantitative and qualitative dimensions.

    ¥      Students’ performance on progress-monitoring measures can be used to set individual goals and
           aimlines (i.e., individual-referenced evaluation) and should be graphed for visual monitoring of
           student progress (Olinghouse, 2009). Progress monitoring on both quantitative and
           qualitative dimensions should be documented, graphed, and used for instructional
           decision making.
    ¥      Standardized administration procedures (e.g., directions, format) should be established for writing
           probes used in K-12 formative assessment. Administration procedures should structure how
           writing samples will be elicited for quantitative and qualitative scoring.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-34
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



Data Source 3:              Summative Assessment
    A third data source is summative assessment. Prior to the adoption of the Common Core State
Standards by the majority of states, state-level summative assessment systems (including Oregon’s)
utilized direct writing assessments administered during the spring of selected grades to gauge
students’ progress toward writing benchmarks.             In many cases, summative assessments require
students to demonstrate writing skills at only one point in time and to a relatively neutral writing prompt.
As a result, students may not have the opportunity to apply the writing process in an authentic manner
(Berninger, Garcia,       & Abbott, 2010). Therefore, summative assessments should include the following
components, each of which will be discussed in detail:

    Summative assessments should focus on the writing process and the writing product.                                Often
the assessment includes one writing session and scores focus primarily on the final product (Berninger,
Garcia, & Abbott, 2010). Focus on the product is undoubtedly important, not only because we want to
ensure that the final product has academic value but also because it is important for students to focus
(and receive feedback) on the organization and coherence of their writing and their mastery of
mechanical details (e.g., spelling, punctuation, grammar, etc.) (Calfee & Miller, 2007).

    Writing assessments that focus solely on the final product, however, fail to recognize the importance
of providing students the opportunity to apply the writing process is an authentic manner; rarely, for
example, are students expected to respond to a prompt in one session with little (or no) opportunity to
plan for how they will respond to the assigned task. Because writing is such a cognitively demanding task
that frequently requires multiple revisions, it is not surprising that methods for improving written texts need
to include time for: (a) discussing ideas with a partner before starting to write, (b) planning one’s response
to the prompt, (c) writing a first draft, (d) engaging in the revision process (which may include receiving
peer and/or teacher feedback) and, (e) reviewing and editing the changes made to be incorporated into a
final, polished draft. The traditional essay test does not allocate time for these important activities (Cho,
2003).   Students who produce writing samples in a process-oriented context with time for planning,
editing, and revision include more elaborated ideas and clearer organization and coherence than those
who produce writing samples in a context where the focus is on the final product (Cho, 2003).

    Based on these findings, summative writing assessments should include time for planning and
revision, as well as tools to support students’ progression                in the writing process. Although the
purposes of formative and summative assessment differ, there is no reason that their structures cannot
be aligned so that students engage in the same processes when completing both types of assessment.


                                 Recommendations            for Summative        Assessments

                            Include multiple samples of student writing
                            Include writing samples from multiple genres (e.g., opinion/argument,
                            informative/explanatory, and narrative) and multiple levels within each
                            genre (e.g., sentences, paragraphs, etc.)
                      e     Use writing prompts that are explicit, authentic, and engaging
                      e     Focus on the writing process in addition to the final product
                      e     Use analytic scoring systems that focus on three main components of
                            writing: (1) content and organization, (2) writing style, and (3) mechanics
                            and conventions



OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                              WA-35
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



Data Source 4: Instructionally-Based Writing Portfolios
    Writing portfolios “pull the assessment system” together in an integrated, comprehensive manner.
Writing portfolios, collections of student writing, formative assessment probes, and self-
reflections, demonstrate progression in all aspects of the writing process (e.g., planning, writing,
editing, revising) (Wesson & King, 1992). Portfolios capture a rich array of knowledge and skill compared
to the writing knowledge evaluated by standardized, multiple-choice assessments. Overall, portfolios
provide an instructionally-based context for the production of work (Arter & Spandel, 1992;
Gearhart & Wolf, 1997; Herman, Gearhart,            & Baker, 1993).

    Instructionally-based, learner-centered portfolios reflect classroom practices and support
instructional decision-making; assessment-based portfolios are designed to evaluate students’
progress and achievement (Gearhart, 2010). Not surprisingly, instructionally-based and assessment
portfolios differ in purpose (i.e., providing students’ opportunities to learn from and reflect on their
participation in the writing process versus collecting data for grading, promotion, and transition decisions),
which influence the types of documents and samples that are included in the portfolio (Arter & Spandel,
1992; Herman, Gearhart & Baker, 1993).
    Instructionally-based portfolios are actively used to facilitate seamless instruction and
assessment integration in writing instruction and as opportunities for students and teachers to
discuss writing and writing progress on an on-going basis. An example of how portfolios integrate
assessment and instruction is through student goal-setting.            A student’s grade-level writing goals could be
listed in a portfolio as well as a student’s writing process goals, such as the goals listed in the table below.
Process goals are often identified during teacher-student writing conferences and applied during the
revision process. Goals can be listed on a edit/revise checklist and revision goals can also be
documented in a portfolio (Olinghouse & Santangelo, 2010). (See the Instruction Chapter for more
information about setting instructional goals during writing conferences).




                                 Writing Process Goals for Student Writing

                 General purpose of the paper — “Write a paper that will be fun to read.”
                 Completeness of the paper — “Write a story that has all of the basic parts.”
                 Length — “Write a paper that is 120 words long.”             “OR Write a paper with ten
                                                                         Wt




                 sentences.” OR “Write a paper with five paragraphs.”

                 Specific Attributes — “Write a paper that has four reasons to support your premise.”
                 OR “Share with the reader four things about the main character.”

                 Vocabulary — “Write a story containing 15 describing words.”

                 Sentence Variety — “Write a paper in which one-fourth of the sentences are either
                 compound or complex.”

                 Mechanics — “Write a paper with no spelling errors.”




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-36
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                 ASSESSMENT — Writing



    Another integrated assessment-instruction example involves the use of portfolios for student self-
monitoring. Notice how the sample graphs below align with the quantitative and qualitative scoring used
for formative assessment. The following “Writing Rockets” graph provides an opportunity for students to
graph number of words written (i.e., fluency, quantitative scoring, number of words written per minute or
per 3-minutes). The “My Story Graph” could align with a primary trait scoring system and rubric focused
on story elements (i.e., qualitative scoring). Finally, Describing Words, could align with the quantitative
scoring of vocabulary, or expand on a primary trait scoring system and rubric emphasizing the use of
“descriptive examples” in argument writing.



                                                Progress Monitoring
                                     Sample Graphs for Student Self-Monitoring



                           .    45              15                  15                15
                      <a
                      Qa
                      ce        14              14                  14                14
                      Lol)
                      L         13              13                  13                13
                      S         12              12                  12                12
                      c
                 .              11              11                  11                11
                zi    5         10              10                  10                10
                 Y    £         9               9                   9                 9
                 5  3
                 2s             8               8                   8                 8
                 So             7               7                   7                 7
                 FE 2
                ec              6               6                   6                 6

                 3    g£        5               5                   5                 5
                      £
                      ao        4               4                  4                  4
                      =
                      <c        3               3                   3                 3
                      =         2               2                   2                 2
                                1               1                   1                 1


                               a: a                                      rn                ao




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                                 Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                         WA-37
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                   ASSESSMENT — Writing




                    My Story Graph                                              Name:

                    Seven Parts of a Story:
                    1:
                    2:
                    3:
                    4:
                    5:
                    6:
                    7:



                          7               7                7                7              7          7
                          6               6                 6               6              6           6
                          5               5                5                5              5          5
                          4               4                4                4              4          4
                          3               3                 3               3              3           3
                          2               2                 2               2              2           2
                          1               1                 1               1              1           1




                                                         DESCRIBING WORDS
                     15
                     14
                     13
                     12
                     11
                     10
                     9
                     8
                     7
                     6
                     5
                     4

                     3
                     2
                     1

                  Date
                                     Fill in the number of describing words used in your essay.


  *From Harris & Graham (1996). Making the Writing Process Work: Strategies for Composition and Self-regulation. Cambridge,
  MA: Brookline. See the Resources section of this chapter for full-page versions of these templates.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                                 Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                           WA-38
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



    Instructionally-based portfolios are valuable as they represent multiple samples of student writing.
No single writing sample provides adequate information about a student’s ability (Cho, 2003). In addition,
student performance in one genre of writing is not likely to generalize to another. The collection of
multiple writing samples, therefore, enables teachers to see students’ writing develop over time and
provides a more reliable and consistent picture of writing development. The use of multiple writing
samples to monitor students’ progress, for example, will minimize the possibility that a student's
performance on an assigned writing task is due to extraneous factors specific to the student (e.g., the
student had a bad day), the task (e.g., the writing prompt didn’t relate to the student’s background or
experience) or the conditions under which the task was assigned (e.g., the student was distracted by
other activities taking place in the classroom).

     Research also indicates that portfolios may be especially suitable for examining English
learner’s writing progress because portfolios provide a broad measure of what students can do —
not only because portfolios typically incorporate evidence of student progression throughout stages of the
writing process, but also because writing samples are collected over time and balance the timed-writing
context that could be problematic for English learners (Hamp-Lyons, 1996). Portfolios also provide
opportunities to see the language development of students as they move, for example, from using
simple sentences (that may or may not be grammatically correct) with limited word choice to well-
constructed, complex sentences that include a wide variety of vocabulary. Information from portfolios can
also help differentiate and scaffold writing instruction for ELs (e.g., focus on verb tense and verb
conjugation first, then move into the position of adjectives and adverbs, etc.).

    Ideally, instructionally-based portfolios are integrated into the assessment and instruction of writing.
They can facilitate instructional decision-making, foster opportunities for collaboration among students,
teachers, and family members, and provide opportunities for students to set individual writing goals.
Portfolios also provide an excellent opportunity to showcase students’ writing progression as they work on
pieces over extended periods of time (CCSS for ELA & Literacy, Writing Standard 10) and/or as they
participate in research projects to build and present knowledge (CCSS for ELA & Literacy, Writing
Standard 7).



                                        Instructionally-based Portfolios
                                                     Content Ideas

         Grade-level and instructional goals (Arter & Spandel, 1992; Gearhart, 2010)
         Multiple writing samples produced at different times, in different instructional contexts, and with
         different genres

         “Authentic” and “published” writing samples

         “Raw,” unedited samples of students’ work (including planning sheets, outlines, drafts, etc.) and
         final products
    v    Reflections by students, teachers, and/or family members on work showcased                    in the portfolio
         (Arter & Spandel, 1992; Gearhart, 2010)
    ¥    Formative assessment writing samples with quantitative scoring and qualitative scoring (i.e.,
         clearly-defined rubrics for examining the quality of work)



OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                                WA-39
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing




                                        Instructionally-based Portfolios
                                                     Content Ideas

         Progress monitoring data and graphs

         Self-monitoring graphs and check-lists

         Writing process materials (e.g., think sheets, planning sheets, edit-revise forms for self-, peer-,
         and teacher-review)

         Vocabulary lists

         Conventions/Mechanics reminder check lists

         Other ideas for making instructionally-based portfolio an active and integral component of writing
         instruction?



                                                      Summary
    In conclusion,    a comprehensive writing assessment system for K-12              is explicitly linked to formative
and summative writing goals and uses multiple data sources to evaluate student writing. Multiple data
sources consist of (1) the use of reading assessments as indicators of student reading and potential
writing ability, (2) formative assessments that utilize quantitative and qualitative scoring procedures to
evaluate writing productivity and quality, (3) summative assessments that include product and process
samples of student work, and (4) instructionally-based portfolios are actively used to facilitate seamless
instruction and assessment integration in writing instruction and pull the “assessment system together.”




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-40
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                 ASSESSMENT — Writing



                                                    References


Abbott, R. D. & Berninger, V.W. (1993). Structural equation modeling of relationships among
         developmental skills and writing skills in primary- and intermediate-grade writers. Journal of
         Educational Psychology, 85(3), 478-508.

Amato, J. M.,    & Watkins, M. W. (2011). The predictive validity of CBM writing indices for eighth-grade
         students. The Journal of Special Education, 44, 195-204.
Andrade, H.L., Du, Y.,      & Wang, X. (2008).      Putting rubrics to the test: The effect of a model, criteria
         generation, and rubric-referenced self-assessment on elementary-school students’ writing.
         Educational Measurement Issues and Practices, 27(2), 3-13.
Arter, J. A., & Spandel, V. (1992). Using portfolios of student work in instruction and assessment.
          Educational Measurement Issues and Practice, 11(1), 36-44.
Benson, B. J. & Campbell, H. M. (2010). Assessment of student writing with curriculum-based
         measurement.      In G. A. Troia (Ed.) Instruction and assessment for struggling writers: Evidence-
         based practices (pp. 337-357). New York, NY: Guilford.

Berninger, V. (1999). Coordinating transcription and text generation in working memory during
         composing: Automatic and constructive processes. Learning Disability Quarterly, 22, 99-112.

Berninger, V. W., Abbott, R. D., Rogan, L., Reed, E., Abbott, S., Brooks, S., Vaughan, K., & Graham, S.
         (1998). Teaching spelling to children with specific learning disabilities: The mind’s ear and eye
         beat the computer or pencil. Learning Disability Quarterly, 21(2), 1-17.
Berninger, V. W., Garcia, N. P., & Abbott, R. D. (2010). Multiple processes that matter in writing
         instruction and assessment.       In G. R. Troia (Ed.) Instruction and assessment for struggling writers:
         Evidence-based practices (pp. 15-50). New York, NY: Guilford.

Berninger, V. W., Cartwright, A. C., Yates, C. M., Swanson,            H. L., & Abbott, R. D. (1994). Developmental
         skills related to writing and reading acquisition in the intermediate grades: Shared and unique
         functional systems. Reading and Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 6, 161-196.

Berninger, V. W., Vaughan, K. B., Graham, S., Abbott, R. D., Abbott, S. P., Rogan, L. W.,                             Brooks,
A., & Reed, E. (1997). Treatment of handwriting problems in beginning writers:                  Transfer from
handwriting to composition. Journal of Educational Psychology, 89, 652- 666.
Black, P. & Wiliam, D. (October, 1998). Inside the black box: Raising standards through classroom
         assessment. Phi Delta Kappan, 80(2), 139-148.
Bradfield, T. A. (2009). General outcome measures of beginning handwriting development. (Unpublished
         doctoral dissertation). University of Minnesota: Twin Cities, MN.

Brookhart, S. M. (Winter 2003). Developing measurement theory for classroom assessment purposes
         and uses. Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice, 5-11.

Calfee, R. C., & Miller, R. G. (2007). Best practices in writing assessment. In S. Graham, C. A. MacArthur,
        & J. Fitzgerald (Eds.) Best practices in writing instruction (pp. 265-286). New York, NY: Guilford.
Cameron, J. (1998). The right to write: An invitation and initiation into the writing life. New York: Jeremy P.
         Tarcher/Putnam.



OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                              WA-41
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



Cho, Y. (2003). Assessing writing: Are we bound by only one method? Assessing Writing, 8, 165-191.

         Consortium on Reading Excellence (2008)

Consortium of Reading Excellence (2008). Assessing reading: Multiple measures for kindergarten though
         twelfth grade (2™ ed.). Novato, CA: Arena.
Cox, B. E., Shanahan, T. & Sulzby, E. (1990). Good and poor elementary readers’ use of cohesion in
         writing. Reading Research Quarterly, 25(1), 47-65.
Deno, S. L. (1985). Curriculum-based measurement: The emerging alternative. Exceptional Children, 52,
         219-232.
Deno, S. L. Marston, D., & Mirkin, P. (1982). Valid measurement procedures for continuous evaluation of
         written expression. Exceptional Children, 48, 368-371.

Dickson, S. (1999). Integrating reading and writing to teach compare-contrast text structure: A research-
         based methodology.       Reading and Writing Quarterly,         14, 49-79.

Edwards, L. (2000). The role of spelling and handwriting in kindergarten instruction: An examination of the
         effects of two beginning reading instructional interventions on the reading and spelling
         achievement of kindergarten students at-risk of reading disabilities. Unpublished doctoral
         dissertation, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR.

Englert, C., Stewart, S. R.,     & Hiebert, E. H. (1988). Young writers’ use of text structure in expository text
         generation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 80, 143-151.
Espin, C. A., Scierka, B. J., Skare, S., & Halverson, N. (1999). Criterion-validity of curriculum-based
         measures in writing for secondary students. Reading and Writing Quarterly, 14, 5-27.
Espin, C., Shin, J., Deno, S. L., Skare, S., Robinson, S.,          & Benner, B. (2000). Identifying indicators of
         written expression proficiency for middle school students. The Journal of Special Education,
         34(3), 140-153.
Fewster, S. & Macmillan, P. D. (2002). School-based evidence for the validity of curriculum-based
         measurement of reading and writing. Remedial and Special Education, 23(3), 149-156.

Fitzgerald, J.   & Shanahan, T. (2000). Reading and writing relations and their development. Educational
         Psychologist, 35(1), 39-50.

Gearhart, M. (2010). Classroom portfolio assessment for writing. In G. A. Troia (Ed.) Instruction and
         assessment for struggling writers: Evidence-based practices (pp. 311-336). New York, NY:
         Guilford.

Gearhart, M., & Wolf, S. A. (1997). Issues in portfolio assessment: Assessing writing processes from their
         products. Educational Assessment, 4, 265-296.

Goldberg, N. (2010).     Writing down the bones: Freeing the writer within. Boston: Shambahala.

Hamp-Lyons, L. (1996). The challenges of second-language writing assessment.                     In E. M. White, W. D.
         Lutz,   & S. Kaumusikiri (Eds.) Assessment of writing: Politics, policies, and practices (pp. 226-
         240). New York, NY: Modern Language Association of America.
Herman, J. L., Gearhart, M., & Baker, E. L. (1993). Assessing writing portfolios: Issues in the validity and
       meaning of scores. Educational Assessment, 1(3), 201-224.



OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-42
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



Hessler, T., Konrad, M., & Alber-Morgan, S. (2009). Assess student writing. Intervention in School and
          Clinic, 45(1), 69-71.
Huot, B. (1990). The literature of direct writing assessment: Major concerns and prevailing trends. Review
          of Educational Research, 60, 237-263.

Huot, B. (1996). Toward a new theory of writing assessment. College Composition and Communication,
         47(4), 549-566.

Jewell, J. & Malecki, C. K. (2005). The utility of CBM written language indices: An investigation of
          production-dependent, production-independent, and accurate-production scores. Schoo!
          Psychology Review, 34(1), 27-44.

Juel, C. (1988). Learning to read and write: A longitudinal study of 54 children from first through fourth
          grades. Journal of Educational Psychology, 80, 437-447.
LaBerge, D., & Samuels, S. J. (1974). Toward a theory of automatic information processing in reading.
        Cognitive Psychology, 6, 293-323.

Lembke,     E. Deno, S. L. & Hall, K. (2003). Identifying an indicator of growth in early writing proficiency for
          elementary school students. Assessment for Effective Intervention, 28, 23-35.
Lerkkanen, M., Rasku-Puttonen,          H., Aunola, K., & Nurmi, J. (2004). The developmental dynamics of
          literacy skills during the first grade. Educational Psychology, 24(6), 793-810.

McMaster, K. L., Du, X., & Pétursdottir, A. (2009). Technical features of curriculum-based measures for
          beginning writers. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 42(1), 41-60.

McMaster,    K. L. & Campbell, H. (2008). New and existing curriculum-based writing measures: Technical
          features within and across grades. School Psychology Review, 37(4), 550-566.

McMaster, K. & Espin, C. (2007). Technical features of curriculum-based measurement in writing: A
        literature review. The Journal of Special Education, 41(2), 68-84.
Metcalf, L. T.,   & Simon, T. (2002).    Writing the mind alive: The proprioceptive method for finding your
          authentic voice. New York: Ballantine.

Miller, L. (2009). Informal and qualitative assessment of writing skills in students with disabilities.
          Assessment for Effective Intervention, 34, 178-191.

Miller, M. D., & Crocker, L. (1990). Validation methods for direct writing assessment. Applied
          Measurement in Education, 3(3), 285-296.

Moats, L., Foorman, B., & Taylor, P. (2006). How quality of instruction impacts high-risk fourth graders’
          writing. Reading and Writing, 19, 363-391.

National Center on Education Statistics. (2010). NAEP data explorer [Data file]. Washington DC: U.S.
          Department of Education. Retrieved December 31, 2010 from
          http:///nces.ed/gov/nationsreportcard/neapdata/report.aspx.

National Commission on Writing in America’s Schools and Colleges (2003).                   The Neglected “R”’: The Need
          for a Writing Revolution. College Entrance Examination Board.

National Reading Panel. (2000). Teaching children to read: An evidence-based assessment of the
          scientific research literature on reading and its implications for instruction (NIH Publication No.
          00-4769). Washington,      DC: National Institute of Child Health and Human            Development.


OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-43
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



National Research Council. (1998). Preventing reading difficulties in young children. C. E. Snow, M. S.
         Burns, & P. Griffin (Eds.) Washington DC: National Academy Press.
Olinghouse, N. (Summer 2009). Writing assessment for struggling learners. Perspectives on Language
         and Literacy.
Olinghouse, N. G.,     & Santangelo, T. (2010). Assessing the writing of struggling learners. Focus on
         Exceptional Children, 43, 1-27.

Oregon Department of Education. (2005). Assessment Overview: Writing. Retrieved from the Oregon
       Department of Education website: http://www.ode.state.or.us/search/results/?id=238.
Oregon Department of Education. (2009). Statewide Report Card 2008-2009: An Annual Report to the
       Legislature on Oregon Public Schools. Retrieved from the Oregon Department of Education
         website: http://www.ode.state.or.us/data/annreportcard/rptcard2009.pdf.

Parodi, G. (2007). Reading-writing connections: Discourse-oriented research. Reading and Writing, 20,
         225-250.

Perfetti, C. A. (1985). Reading ability. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Pierce, L. V.,   & O'Malley, J. M. (1992). Performance and portfolio assessment for language minority
         students. NCBE Program Information Guide Series, 9, 1-38.
Plake, B. S. (2003). Optimal synergy between large-scale testing and classroom assessments. National
         Council on Measurement in Education Newsletter, 11(3), 1-2.
Rezaei, A. R., & Lovorn, M. (2010). Reliability and validity of rubrics for assessment through writing.
        Assessing Writing, 15, 18-39.
Richgels, D. T., McGee, L. M., Lomax, R. G., & Sheard, C. (1987), Awareness of four text structures:
         Effects on recall of expository text.      Reading Research Quarterly, 22, 177-196.

Ritchey, K. D. (2008). The building blocks of writing: Learning to write letters and spell words.               Reading
         and Writing, 21, 27-47.

Rose, T. (2007). How to conduct writing CBM.           In M.K. Hosp, J. L. Hosp, & K. W. Howell (Eds.)           The ABCs
         of CBM: A practical guide to curriculum-based measurement (pp. 84-96). New York, NY: Guilford.

Sadler, R. D. (1989). Formative assessment and the design of instructional systems.                  /nternational
         Science, 18, 119-144.
Salvia, J., & Ysseldyke, J. (2001). Assessment (8th ed.). Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Shanahan, T. (1988). The reading-writing relationship: Seven instructional principles.                The Reading
         Teacher, 41(7), 636-647.

Shanahan, T. (2010). Connecting reading and writing instruction for struggling learners. In G. A. Troia
         (Ed.) Instruction and assessment for struggling writers: Evidence-based practices (pp. XX-XX).
         New York, NY: Guilford.
Shanahan, T.,     & Lomax, R. G. (1986). An analysis and comparison of theoretical models of the reading-
         writing relationship. Journal of Educational Psychology,           78(2), 116-123.

Tindal, G.,   & Marston, D. (1990). Classroom-based assessment. Columbus, OH: Prentice Hall.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-44
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



Videen, J., Deno, S. L.,     & Marston, D. (1982). Correct word sequences: A valid indicator of proficiency in
         written expression (Vol. IRLD-RR-84).         University of Minnesota,      Institute for Research on Learning
         Disabilities.

Weigle, S. C. (2007). Teaching writing teachers about assessment.               Journal of second language writing,
          16, 194-209.
Weissenburger, J. W. & Espin, C.A. (2005). Curriculum-based measures of writing across grade levels.
         Journal of School Psychology, 43, 153-169.
Wesson, C. L., & King, R. P. (1992). The role of curriculum-based measurement in portfolio assessment.
         Diagnostique, 18(1), 27-37.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-45
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



                                                     Resources

Sample Probe Directions

Today you are going to write to a prompt. | will read the directions to you. We will read
the prompt together. You will have 2 minutes to think about what you want to write. You
can use the back of your paper to write your ideas. When the two minutes are up, | will
tell you to begin writing. After 3-minutes, | will ask you to underline the word you just
finished writing. Then, you can complete your piece. Are there any questions?

Answer questions as needed. Then, read and review prompt.

Sample Probe

You will have up to 60 minutes to plan, write, and proofread your response to the
following writing prompt:


 Your school is considering ending summer vacations and going to year-round
 schooling. What do you think is best for students?

 Write an essay that argues your position about year-round school.


Plan
Before you write:
    e    Read the prompt carefully so you understand exactly what you are being asked
         to do.
    e    Consider the topic, task, and audience.
         Think about what you want to write.
    e    Use scratch paper to organize your thoughts. Use strategies like mapping or
         outlining.

Write
As you write:
         Maintain a clear and consistent position or argument.
         Include specific details; use examples and reasons to support your argument.
         Use a variety of well-constructed, complete sentences.
         Use a logical organization with an obvious introduction, body, and conclusion.

Proofread
After you write:
______   Did you support your ideas with specific details?
_____    Do the point of view and tone of the essay remain consistent?
______ Check for capitalization spelling, sentence structure, punctuation, and usage
     errors.

OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-46
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing




Student Name:

      CCW:
      CWS:
      Rubric:




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-47
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                 ASSESSMENT — Writing




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-48
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



Alphabet Writing Measure (Edwards, 2000; Based on Berninger et al., 1997)

Materials:     easerless pencil, student response sheet, scrap paper, stopwatch


                                               Alphabet Writing Measure
                                                       Overview

    Alphabet Writing Task (1 minute timed):

    Students are given a response sheet and pencil. The test administrator dictates letter names in random
    order. The student writes the lowercase alphabetic letters as quickly and accurately as they can from
    memory. One minute timed administration.

    score: Number of correct letter formations per minute.

    Note: Task requires students to access letter forms in memory, retrieve the forms, and produce them in
    writing.


DIRECTIONS

lam going to ask you to write the letters of the alphabet. | will tell you the name of a letter, and
you will write that letter. For example, if I tell you to write the letter a, you will write the letter a like
this [ a ] (Examiner writes the lowercase letter a on the examiner sheet). When I say the name of a
letter, | want you to try to write the lowercase or “small” letter (Refer to the lowercase, “small” letter
a).

Let’s practice one together in the box on the top of your page. Your turn to write the letter t. Write
the lowercase (“small”) letter on the top of your page.

If the student writes the letter t correct:
        Very good, | like how you wrote the letter t.

If the student write a capital t:
      Very good. You wrote a capital t. This is the way you write the “small” letter t. (Write the model
on the examiner sheet.)

If the student doesn’t know how to write the letter_t, or is the student responds incorrectly:
      I like the way you tried (or, | like how hard you were thinking). You can write the letter t like
this [t]. (Write the model on the examiner sheet).

Remember, I’Il say the name of the letter and you write the letter. You may write your letters in
each box. First letter here (point to first box), second letter here (point to second box), etc. (show
student left-to-right flow of boxes). If you make a mistake, you may cross out the letter with your
pencil and re-write it. Any questions? Now let’s begin.

The first letter is c (Start stopwatch). . .Continue to read the letters from the list below:

(2) 0               (3) m             (4) t               (5) |
e       Discontinue if student doesn’t know the first 5 letters and score the Alphabet Writing task as 0
e       Ifthe student completes the task in less than one minute prorate the score into a per-minute
        calculation.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-49
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-50
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



                                                   Alphabet Writing




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-51
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                 ASSESSMENT — Writing




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-52
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                 ASSESSMENT — Writing




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-53
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



                                           Alphabet Writing Scoring

    e    Student responses are scored according to the number of correctly written capital
         or lowercase letters in 1-minute.
    e    To be considered          a correctly formed         letter,   a student’s letter needs to be
         recognizable out of context, and reasonably proportional and aligned with the
         “header,” “belt,” “footer,” and “basement” lines (Berninger et al., 1997).




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-54
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



Scoring Correct Word Sequences (CWS):

Purpose: CWS considers units of writing and their relation to one another (Espin, Shin,
    Deno, Skare, Robinson, Benner, 2000).

Spelling

    ¢    Correctly-spelled words make up a correct writing sequence

    ¢    Example: ‘Ils “that *a‘*red ‘car                     ?

Punctuation

    ¢    Necessary marks of punctuation (excluding commas) are included in correct
         writing sequences

    ¢    Example:         “Is *that*‘a*red*car*?

Syntax

    ¢    Syntactically-correct words make up a correct writing sequence

    *    Example:         “Is “*that*a*red*car*? OR                      “Is*that*a*car               red?

Semantics

    ¢    Semantically-correct words make up a correct writing sequence

    *    Example:         “Is*that*‘a*red*car*’                    ?OR“Is*that*a              read      car*?

Initial Words of a Writing Sample

    ¢    If correct, the initial word of a writing sample is counted as a correct writing
         sequence

    ¢    Example:        “Is*that*a*red*car*?                      OR       is   that*a*red* car’?

Titles

    ¢    Titles are included in the correct writing sequence count

    ¢    Example:        * The “* Terrible * Day




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-55
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                  ASSESSMENT — Writing



Dates and Numbers

    ¢    With the exception of dates, numbers written in numeral form are not included in
         the correct writing sequence

    ¢    Example: * The 14 soldiers * waited “in * the * cold *.
         OR    %*The “crash * occurred “in * 1976 %.


                                                 CWS Scoring Practice
                                                     Example 1

                                                    Scoring Practice
                                                      Your turn...

                                 | woud     drink water from           the ocean
                                and      | woud     eat the fruit off of
                                the trees. Then          | woud     bilit a
                                 house     out    of trees, and     | woud
                                gather firewood          to stay warm.        |
                                woud      try and     fix my    boat    in my
                                Spare     time.




                                      Check Your Scoring. . .

                      Al woud drink “ water “ from” the “ ocean
                                                                                                     TAM




                      Sand“! woud eat’ the”      fruit’ off% of
                      \the “ trees *.4 Then” | woud bilit a
                      Ahouse * out” of “ trees, * and” | woud
                                                                                                     WHDAA




                      Agather “ firewood “ to”                    stay * warm”.*            |
                      woud try” and“                fix* my“ boat * in*                my
                      ‘ spare “ time”.


                                           Correct Word Sequences                      37




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                                Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                          WA-56
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                 ASSESSMENT — Writing




                                              CWS Scoring Practice
                                                  Example 2


                                        Extra Scoring Practice

                         | was     outside when          a spasce       ship
                         landed.     | jumped        so hight of the swing
                         | hit my      head     on the      bar. Out of the
                         space     ship came        a puppy       dog     he
                         looked     around      and, said “Where am |”.




                                    Check Your Scoring...

                ‘| ‘ was’ outside         * when“ a spasce             ship                         5
                Alanded’.®        |“ jumped“        so   hight    of the’ swing
                [4 hit * my “ head “* on “ the’ bar’.’ Out “ of the                                 10
                Aspace’®     ship* came’ a “puppy*               dog    he
                looked “ around”          and, said ““Where am 1|”"4.%                              5




                                                Correct Word Sequences                              32




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                              Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework — Writing                            WA-57
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                                                                                          ASSESSMENT — Writing



Reliability Calculation Sheet

Student Name                                                                      Score 1 | Score 2 | Hit Tally




                                                                                                 Total Hits



                                                                                  Total Possible           Hits

                                                                                          Reliability
                                                                           (Reliability Coefficient)

                                                          Decisions Use

 Reliability Coefficient                      Meaning                                     Decision Use

 .80 and less                                 Weak                                        Don’t use for any decisions!

 .81-.84                                      Moderate                                    Group Decisions

 .85-.90                                      Average                                     Group Decisions and High Stakes
                                                                                          Decisions

 .91-.93                                      Strong                                      High Stakes Decisions
 .94-.99                                      Almost Perfect

 (Webb, 1983)
*Jenizsch, C., &Tindal, G. (1991). Research, consultation, and Teaching program training module no. 8: Analytic scoring of writing.
Eugene, OR: University of Oregon College of Education, Behavioral Research and Teaching.




OREGON LITERACY PLAN                                 Oregon K-12 Literacy Framework —           Writing                       WA-58
Developed by the Literacy Leadership State Team (LLST) in partnership with the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
                                      NromMornwownwennronod
                                Gee
                                -     NroF®mM~noNnrnnNro
                                      Oe
SYN            vamon,           =VeEorrronwrrnro
                           wo         vy      ve
Bods                        %         ==       6
rom                                   ae ae
 <
FOO                        Ss         vr      oFPro     wm ~~ SP) Nro
     x                                NrOmwmwnrnonwrnnro
>                               <9    ee
Bez?                 ay         =     Ne      SMDRONTOMNYTO
Oo                         <p,        Ne           ODrnwontrnnro
=                          Sse         VT     oP®mnonranro
Seo                             u     Yrlewmrnonvonro
3)             Sp
                    HD          Re    Nrae: Oan
                                      ee
                                                       oOnwwrnnro
Bey                os           =znvreoeroro              TON     ro
O-rwh £                oD
S        2          Khe               Nroegonro           vT~ONro
e=                         Se          Ve oMmnrwontanro
s                               u     Yrerenmnnwonrnnro
Me        Fr        ISay        HEH    Nr      SOwmPpPronwynnNro
 ©       Se       as                  NereO&mg@wmwrwonrnnro
5Tc      2 g 8ig7 se                  Nr ooor     wT  nnr oO
—                          Sse        xv3ree           oOnytrnranro
 8                              u     Sreoeoaoarwonwrnanro
@        FP    OYZIOF                 pe      SCmMOwmWrnONMYTNA   YO
 ©
Tp)                 “ony   yr
                                =     Nr       Om@ernwonvnnro
SS                         SseNreereorontanro
          Notes:
 tse]
 c
<
                         DESCRIBING WORDS
15

14

13

12

11

10




     Fill in the number of describing words used in your essay.
     14




                           10




                                                                            a
15




          13

                 12

                      11




                                oO     00   Mm   ce)   Ww    +   fap)   N
wn   +    fap)   N    |    O
el   el   el     el   el   A    (o>)   00   MN   <e)   uw)   +   a0]    N   el
wn   +    fap)   N    |    O
el   el   el     el   el   A    (o>)   00   MN   <e)   uw)   +   a0]    N   el
wn   +    fap)   N    |    O
el   el   el     el   el   A    (o>)   00   MN   <e)   uw)   +   a0]    N   el




                                                                                 Date
 ‘ydes3 ay} UO Ud}M SPJOM JO JAaQUUNU Je}0} BU} UI |II4
  My Story Graph
                            Name:

  Seven Parts of a Story:
ANM
  TiN woe
                                  1                             3                                 5
                                                                                   The essay s well organized. It
                   Little or nothing is written.   The essay is not complete. It
                                                                                   has an introduction,
                   The essay is disorganized,      lacks an introduction, well-
                   incoherent, and poorly          developed body, or              supporting, and concluding       X6
                   developed. The essay does       conclusion. The coherence       paragraph. There Is
Organization]      not address the topic.          and sequence are attempted      coherence, a logical order of
                                                   but not adequate.               ideas, and fully developed
                                                                                   content.


                  The student writes frequent      The student makes               The sentences are complete        X5
                  run-ons or fragments.            occasional errors in            and varied in length and
Sentence                                           sentence structure. Little      structure.
Structure                                          variety in sentence length of
                                                   sentence structure exists..


                  The student makes frequent       The student makes               The usage is correct. Word        X4
                  errors in word choice and        occasional errors in            choice is appropriate.
  Usage           agreement.                       mechanics.




                  The student makes frequent       The student makes an            The spelling, capitalization,     X4
                  errors in spelling,              occasional error in             and punctuation are correct.
 Mechanics      | Punctuation, and                 mechanics.
                  capitalization.



                  The format is sloppy. There      The handwriting, margins,       The format is correct. The
                  are no margins or                and indentations have           title is appropriate. The         X1
  Format          indentations. Handwriting is     occasional inconsistencies —    handwriting, margins, and
                  inconsistent.                    no title or inappropriate       indentations are consistent.
                                                   title.




                                                                                         Overall Total
       Total Words Written

¢ Prompt:
 “When my video game started predicting the
 future, | Knew | had to. . .”


¢ Student Response:
 “got my mom to check it out | was ckerd it
 was hard to recat but my mom holped me
 then my brather came in to my room he
 holped me to but he left my room want down.”

  Total words written per 3-minutes: 39
    Words Spelled Correctly
 Prompt:
 “When my video game started predicting the
 future, | Knew | had to. . .”


 student Response:
 “got my mom to check it out | was ckerd it
 was hard to recat but my mom holped me
 then my brather came in to my room he
 holped me to but he left my room want down.”

Total words spelled correctly per 3-minutes: 34
        Correct Word Sequences
                                                  Because the period
since the first word is correct, It Is            '¢ considered
marked as a correct writing                      essential
sequence.                                        punctuation, it is
                                                 joined with the
                                                 words before and
                                                 after it to make 2
                                                 correct writing
         It       was    *   dark     * .4       sequences.
         Nobody “ could seen
         the * trees * of “ the \
         forrest.                                     .
                                             Grammatical or
              \    Misspelled words          syntactical errors are
                   are not counted.          not correct.
                   Scoring Practice
                     Your turn...

| woud     drink water from             the ocean
and     | woud     eat the fruit off of
the trees.       Then     | woud    bilit a
house     out    of trees, and      | woud
gather firewood           to stay warm.       |
woud     try and        fix my   boat    in my
Spare    time.
         Check Your Scoring. . .

“| woud drink “ water “ from“ the “ ocean




                                              WAH
‘and“1| woud eat” the”       fruit * off of
‘the “ trees *.4 Then” | woud bilit a
“house “ out” of * trees, * and” | woud




                                              WAAA
Agather “ firewood“ to” stay* warm.” |
woud try* and“    fix * my * boat * in” my
“ spare “ time”.


            Correct Word Sequences     37
             Extra Scoring Practice

| was     outside   when a   spasce     ship
landed.     | jumped   so hight of the swing
| hit my     head   on the   bar. Out    of the
Space     ship came    a puppy   dog     he
looked     around   and, said “Where am |”.
               Check Your Scoring. . .

‘| ‘ was’ outside “ when “a    spasce    ship          5
Alanded’.“   |“ jumped     so hight of the’ swing
|* hit * my “ head “ on “ the’ bar’.’ Out “* of’ the   10
Aspace’®   ship* came’ a “puppy”   dog    he
looked “ around”   and, said ““Where am |’4.4          5




                         Correct Word Sequences        32
