    THIS FINAL RULE HAS BEEN SENT TO THE FEDERAL REGISTER FOR PUBLICATION.
PUBLICATION IN THE FEDERAL REGISTER WILL DETERMINE THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS
                                      RULE.

              DEPARTMENT         OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

                24 CFR Parts 5, 880, 884, 886, 891, 903, 960, 966, 982, 983, 990

                                   [Docket No. FR 5743-F-03]

                                         RIN 2577-AC92

               Streamlining Administrative Regulations for Public Housing,
       Housing Choice Voucher, Multifamily Housing, and Community Planning and
                                 Development Programs


AGENCY:     Office of the Deputy Secretary, HUD.

ACTION: Final rule.

SUMMARY:       The Department of Housing and Urban Development Appropriations Act, 2014

(2014 Appropriations Act), made several changes to the United States Housing Act of 1937

(1937 Act). Section 243 of the 2014 Appropriations Act authorized HUD to implement these

changes through notice, followed by notice-and-comment rulemaking. Notices implementing the

changes were published on May 19, 2014, and June 25, 2014. HUD issued a proposed rule on

January 6, 2015, to codify these changes in regulation. In addition, the   January 2015 rule

proposed changes to streamline regulatory requirements pertaining to certain elements of the

Housing Choice Voucher (HCV), Public Housing (PH), and various multifamily housing (MFH)

rental assistance programs; to reduce the administrative burden on public housing agencies

(PHAs) and MFH owners; and to align, where feasible, requirements across programs, including

the Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (HOPWA) and HOME Investment

Partnerships (HOME), which are administered by HUD’s Office of Community Planning and

Development (CPD). HUD also issued an interim rule on September 8, 2015, implementing

changes to flat rents in the Public Housing program made by the Department of Housing and

Urban Development Appropriations Act, 2015 (2015 Appropriations Act).
       This final rule makes changes to the regulatory text as presented in the   January 2015

proposed rule, including additional changes in response to public comment as well as further

consideration by HUD of changes proposed in January 2015, and finalizes the regulatory

changes contained in the September 2015 interim rule.

DATES: Effective Date: [INSERT DATE 30 DAYS AFTER DATE OF PUBLICATION IN

THE FEDERAL       REGISTER].

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION               CONTACT:       For questions regarding programs operated

by HUD’s Office of Community Planning and Development, contact Henrietta Owusu, Director,

Program Policy Division, Office of Affordable Housing Programs, at 202—402—4998. For the

HCV program, contact Becky Primeaux, Director, Housing Voucher Management and

Operations Division, at 202-402-6050. For questions regarding the Multifamily Housing

programs, contact Katherine Nzive, Director, Program Administration Office, Asset

Management and Portfolio Oversight, at 202—708—3000. For the Public Housing program,

contact Todd Thomas, Program Analyst, Public Housing Management and Occupancy Division,

at 678-732-2056. None of the phone numbers included is toll-free. Persons with hearing or

speech impairments may access these numbers through TTY by calling the toll-free Federal

Relay Service at 800-877-8339. Any of the above-listed contacts may also be reached via postal

mail at the following address: Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 7th Street,

SW, Washington, DC, 20410.

SUPPLEMENTARY          INFORMATION:

I. Background

       The 2014 Appropriations Act made changes to certain provisions of the 1937 Act, such

as allowing for biennial physical inspections of certain assisted properties and permitting
alternative inspection methods to be used in certain circumstances, codifying in statute the

definition of “extremely low-income,” and capping utility allowances at the lesser of the unit size

on the voucher or the size of the unit leased by the family. These changes were implemented by

notice;' a proposed rule to codify the changes in regulation was published on January 6, 2015, at

80 FR 423.

         In addition, HUD has solicited recommendations in recent years on how to streamline

program operations to reduce costs and enhance efficiency while still maintaining HUD’s core

program oversight functions. The January 2015 proposed rule included programmatic changes to

implement many of these suggestions. A detailed description of all proposed amendments,

including technical corrections also proposed, and the reasons for the amendments can be found

in the preamble to the      January 6, 2015 proposed rule at 80 FR 424 to 428.

         As further discussed below, portions of this final rule affect the PH program, the HCV

program, the CPD programs mentioned above,” and the following MFH programs:

    e    Project-Based Section 8 (New Construction, State Agency-Financed, Substantial

         Rehabilitation, Rural Housing Services, Loan Management Set-Aside, and Property

         Disposition Set-Aside).

    e    Section   8 Moderate Rehabilitation.




' Notice PIH 2014-12, published May 19, 2014, implemented the changes to flat rents; 79 FR 35940, “HUD
Implementation of Fiscal Year 2014 Appropriations Provisions on Public Housing Agency Consortia, Biennial
Inspections, Extremely Low-Income Definition, and Utility Allowances” (June 25, 2014), implemented all other
changes.
* The only provision in this final regulation that applies directly to the CPD programs is the earned income
disregard. Other provisions that apply do so indirectly, either because of references in program-specific regulations
or due to particular eligible activities that follow the requirements of the Housing Choice Voucher program. The
parenthetical statements at the end of each subpart of section II.A, exclude mention of CPD programs.
* In the January 6, 2015 proposed rule, HUD inadvertently included reference to FHA’s Section 235
Homeownership program, but as provided in a final rule published on April 3, 2015, this program is no longer active
and the regulations were removed by the April 3, 2015 final rule. See http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2015-04-
03/pdf/2015-07597.pdf.
    e   Rent Supplement Program.

    e   Section 202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly Gncluding Project Assistance Contract

        and Project Rental Assistance Contract (PRAC)).

    e   Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons with Disabilities Gncluding PRAC and

        Project Rental Assistance).

    e   Section 236 Interest Reduction Payments Program.

    e   Rental Assistance Payment (RAP) Program.

    e   Sections 221(d)(3) and (d)(5) — FHA Insurance Programs for New Construction or

        Substantially Rehabilitated Multifamily Rental Housing.

        Some of the new flexibilities will require a PHA to make changes to the PHA’s

Admissions and Continued Occupancy Policy, Administrative Plan, or PHA plan in order for the

PHA to adopt the new authorities. HUD encourages all PHAs adopting such flexibilities to make

all required amendments as expeditiously as possible.

        The 2015 Appropriations Act amended section 3 of the 1937 Act to allow for additional

flexibility to the requirement that the flat rental amount be set at no less than 80 percent of the

applicable FMR, as established under 8&(c) of the 1937 Act. HUD may allow a PHA to establish a

flat rent based on an FMR that is based on an area geographically smaller than would otherwise

be used, if HUD determines that the resulting FMR more accurately reflects local market

conditions. In addition,   a PHA may apply to HUD for an exception allowing a flat rental amount

that is lower than the amount otherwise determined under the two allowable FMRs, if HUD

determines that the two FMRs do not reflect the market value of the property and the lower flat

rental amount is based on a market analysis of the applicable market. In either case, the
alternative flat rent must not create a disincentive for families seeking to become economically

self-sufficient to continue to reside in public housing.

        On September 8, 2015, at 80 FR 53709, HUD published an interim rule to amend HUD’s

regulations implementing the 2014 Appropriations Act language on flat rents to allow PHAs the

opportunity to take advantage of the 2015 Appropriations Act authority that provides PHAs with

more flexibility in setting flat rents. HUD advised that the interim rule superseded the portion of

the   January 2015 proposed rule year that addressed the issue of setting flat rents in public

housing. Although HUD issued the September 2015 rule as an interim rule for effect, HUD

sought public comment for a period of 60 days. By the end of the comment period on November

9, 2015, HUD received seven comments.

II. Changes Made At the Final Rule Stage

        In response to public comment and as a result of further consideration of certain issues by

HUD, this final rule makes the following revisions to the     January 2015 proposed rule. With

respect to changes made in response to public comment, the issues raised by the commenter and

HUD’s basis for responding to the comments are addressed in Section IV of this preamble. No

changes are made to the September 2015 interim rule on flat rents.

A. HCV, MFH, and PH Program Regulations

1. Verification of Social Security Numbers (§ 5.216)

        The use of the phrase “date of admission” appeared twice in the proposed rule, first to

identify the endpoint of the 6-month period during which a family member under the age of 6

years who lacks a Social Security Number (SSN) may have been added to an applicant family,

and then again to identify the starting point for the 90-day period allotted to such a family to

obtain an SSN for the newly added child. Commenters stated that, in the HCV program, the
“date of admission” is typically the date of lease-up (1.e., the effective date of the Housing

Assistance Payment (HAP) contract). Prior to lease-up, however,       a PHA may have expended

considerable time and resources pulling a family from the waiting list, obtaining the necessary

verifications, procuring a Housing Quality Standards (HQS) inspection, and performing a rent

reasonableness determination. Lease-up could ultimately occur more than 6 months from the

date the child was added the household, which would result in the household being ineligible for

admission to the program. To obviate such a scenario, HUD has, in this final rule, adopted two

separate “dates of admission” for the HCV program for purposes of this provision: the date of

voucher issuance and the date of lease-up. Specifically, the endpoint of the 6-month period

during which a family member under the age of 6 years may be added to the household is the

date of voucher issuance; the 90-day clock does not start ticking until the date of lease-up. (This

provision applies to the HCV/Project-Based Voucher (PBV), Rent Supplement, Section 8,

Sections 221(d)(3) and (d)(5), Section 236, 202/811, and PH programs.)

2. Definition of Extremely Low—Income Families ($$ 5.603, 903.7, 960.102)

       The definition of an extremely low—income family in the final rule is revised to include

the phrase “a very low-income family,” which is included in the statutory definition and was

inadvertently omitted from the proposed rule. (This provision applies to the HCV/PBV, Section

8, and PH programs. It does not apply to the Rent Supplement, Section 235, Section 236,

Sections 221(d)(3) or (d)(5) programs.)

3. Use of Actual Past Income (§ 5.609)

       For the reasons presented below, HUD has decided against pursuing the regulatory

changes included in the proposed rule.

4. Exclusion of Mandatory Education Fees From Income (§ 5.609(b)(9))
       There is no change from the proposed rule. The final rule includes fees within the

definition of tuition. (This provision applies to the HCV/PBV, Section 8, and PH programs. It

does not apply to the Rent Supplement, Section 236, Sections 221(d)(3) or (d)(5) programs.)

5. Streamlined Annual Reexamination for Fixed Incomes (§§ 5.657, 880.603, 884.218, 886.124,

886.324, 891.410, 891.610, 891.750, 960.257, 982.516)

       Based on comments submitted, this provision was revised substantially from the

proposed rule, which would have provided for a streamlined annual reexamination of family

income for any family whose income consists solely of fixed sources. The final rule provides for

a streamlined income determination for any fixed source of income, even if a person or a family

with a fixed source of income also has a non-fixed source of income. The final rule requires that,

upon admission to a program, third-party verification of all income amounts must be obtained for

all family members, and a full reexamination and redetermination of income must likewise be

performed every 3 years. In the interim, a streamlined income determination may be performed

for a family member with a fixed source of income by applying to a previously determined or

verified source of income a cost of living adjustment (COLA) or interest rate adjustment specific

to each source of fixed income. The COLA or current interest rate applicable to each source of

fixed income must be obtained either from a public source or from tenant-provided, third-party

generated documentation. In the absence of such verification for any source of fixed income,

third-party verification of income amounts must be obtained.

       While the final rule amends more regulatory provisions than the proposed rule, the policy

has not changed. Instead, there are cross-references to 24 CFR 5.657(d), pertaining to the

reexamination of family income and composition in Section 8 project-based assistance programs,

inserted in various MFH regulations herein to avoid confusion and ensure the policy is included
in the regulations for all programs this provision is intended to affect. (This provision applies to

the HCV/PBV,     Section 8 (other than Moderate Rehabilitation), 202/811, and PH programs. It

does not apply to the Rent Supplement, Section 236, Sections 221(d)(3) or (d)(5) programs.)

        HUD recognizes that prior to the issuance of this final rule, the Fixing America’s Surface

Transportation Act, or FAST Act, was signed into law.* Section 78001 of that Act modified the

1937 Act to allow PHAs and owners to undergo full income recertification for families with 90

percent or more of their income from fixed-income sources every three years instead of annually.

HUD believes that while the FAST Act provisions and the provisions contained in this rule are

very similar, they offer different benefits; therefore, HUD is retaining the flexibilities in this final

rule and will issue implementation regulations for the FAST Act separately.

6. Earned Income Disregard (EID) ($$ 5.617, 960.255)

        The proposed rule included a requirement that families maintain continual employment in

order to obtain EID benefits over a straight 24-month period, and it allowed families who

received the full EID benefit and then subsequently requalified for the benefit to obtain it again

(i.e., the proposed rule eliminated the maximum lifetime disallowance). The proposed rule also

included a carve-out for the HOPWA program, which retained the provision unchanged.

        In the final rule, all HUD programs to which the EID applies Gncluding the HOPWA

program) are aligned, the lifetime disallowance is retained, and the requirement to maintain

continual employment is dropped. Ultimately, the only change to the existing regulation adopted

in the final rule is that the benefit now applies for a straight 24-month period, with a clear start

date and end date, irrespective of whether a family maintains continual employment during the

24-month period. PHAs and grantees are no longer obliged to track employment starts and stops,


* Public Law 114-94, signed December 4, 2015.
but only the start date, the 12-month date (on which the amount of the disregard may change

from 100 percent to not less than 50 percent of earned income), and the 24-month (end) date.

        For families enrolled and participating in EID prior to the effective date of this

regulation, the previous requirements will continue to apply. (This provision applies to the

HCV/PBV, HOME, HOPWA, and PH programs. It does not apply to the MFH programs.) HUD

intends to publish a notice describing the changes and the administrative requirements

prospectively. For current recipients of the EID, HUD will reiterate that regulations in effect

immediately prior to this proposed rule will continue to apply until the benefit period expires for

these families.

B. HCV and PH Program Regulations

1. Family Declaration of Assets Under $5,000 ($8 960.259, 982.516)

        Upon further consideration and in light of comments received, HUD made a modest

change to this provision from the proposed to the final rule. The proposed rule would have

authorized a PHA to rely on a family’s declaration starting with the first reexamination and

going forward indefinitely. In the final rule,   a PHA must obtain third-party documentation of

assets every 3 years. The Office of Multifamily Housing Programs in HUD’s Office of Housing

noted support for expansion of this provision to its rental assistance programs and is issuing an

interim final rule to do just that.

2. Utility Reimbursements ($§ 960.253, 982.514)

        The proposed rule provides a PHA with the option of making utility reimbursement

payments “quarterly,” for reimbursements totaling $20 or less per quarter. For the final rule, this

provision is modified somewhat. The amount is raised to $45 or less per quarter. If the PHA opts

to make the payments on a quarterly basis, the PHA must institute a hardship policy for the
                                                                                                      10


tenants if such payments would create a financial hardship for them. Based on a request for

clarification, this provision was modified slightly for this final rule to make clear that

reimbursements must occur no less frequently than once every calendar-year quarter.

Additionally, HUD is issuing an interim final rule to expand this provision to MFH programs.

C. PH Program Regulations

1. Public Housing Rents for Mixed Families (§ 5.520(d))

        There is no change from the proposed rule. The final rule requires PHAs to use the

established flat rent applicable to the unit to calculate rents for mixed families. The final rule also

requires that a mixed family’s payment be equivalent to their total tenant payment (TTP) when

their TTP exceeds the flat rent.

2. Tenant Self-Certification for Community Service Requirements ($$ 960.605, 960.607)

        Just as in the proposed rule, the final rule permits PHAs to accept a tenant’s signed self-

certification of compliance with the community service requirement. However, to better ensure

compliance with the community service requirement, HUD is requiring PHAs to review a sample

of self-certifications and validate their accuracy with the third-party verification procedures

currently in place. The PHA will also need to notify tenants that any self-certification may be

subject to such validation.

3. Public Housing Grievance Procedures (§§$ 966.4 and 966.52 through 966.57)

        Upon further consideration and in light of comments received, HUD has decided against

pursuing regulatory changes pertaining to the requirement that a PHA prepare a summary of any

informal settlement. HUD has also decided against pursuing changes related to the ability of

either party to a grievance to request, at their own expense, that a transcript of a grievance
                                                                                                     11


hearing be prepared. Further, in light of comments received, HUD has provided a clarification

regarding the Limited English Proficiency requirements related to grievance procedures.

        This final rule maintains the elimination of the requirement that PHAs consult resident

organizations before appointing a hearing officer. However, in light of comments that residents

should have input into the selection process, HUD is requiring that PHAs include their policies

regarding the selection process in the tenant lease form, which is subject to a 30-day comment

period. Finally, the final rule also maintains the elimination of the requirement that PHAs retain

a redacted copy of each hearing decision to be made available to prospective complainants, and

in the place of that requirement, requires PHAs to maintain a log of hearing officer decisions as

described through HUD guidance.

4. Limited Vacancies (§ 990.150)

        There is no change from the proposed rule. The final rule clarifies that the number of

vacant units eligible for operating subsidy must be not more than 3 percent of the total units, on a

project-by-project basis.

D. HCV Program Regulations

1. Start of Assisted Tenancy (§ 982.309)

        For the reasons presented below, HUD has decided against pursuing the regulatory

changes included in the proposed rule.

2. Biennial Inspections and the Use of Alternative Inspection Methods ($§ 982.405, 982.406,

983.103)

        Upon further consideration, HUD made a change to this provision to clarify that if an

alternative inspection method employs sampling, the PHA may rely upon that method only if

HCV units are included in the population of units forming the basis of the sample. In addition, in
                                                                                                      12


response to public comments, HUD is requiring PHAs wishing to rely upon inspection methods

other than those conducted pursuant to the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) or HOME

programs, or inspections performed by HUD, to submit to HUD the protocol for the inspection

method they wish to use along with the PHA’s analysis showing that the desired protocol meets

or exceeds HQS. A PHA must submit these materials to HUD for approval and may not rely

upon such alternative inspection methods until such approval has been granted.

3. Housing Quality Standards (HOS) Reinspection Fees (§ 982.405)

       The Department made modest changes to this provision based on comments expressing

concern about the broad nature of this authority and requests for clarity about the treatment of

fees. The proposed rule would have authorized a PHA to charge a reasonable fee if a cited

deficiency remained upon reinspection. The final rule states that the fee may be charged only if

an owner stated that a deficiency had been fixed and the deficiency is found during reinspection

to persist or if a reinspection conducted after the expiration of the timeframe for repairs reveals

that the deficiency persists. With respect to the fee, the final rule makes clear that any fees

collected may be used only for activities related to the provision of tenant-based assistance.

4. Exception Payment Standards for Providing Reasonable Accommodations ($$ 982.503,

982.505)

       There is no change from the proposed rule. The final rule allows a PHA to approve a

payment standard of not more than 120 percent of the FMR without HUD approval if required as

a reasonable accommodation for a family that includes a person with a disability.

5. Family Income and Composition: Reeular and Interim Examinations ($ 982.516(c)-(e))
                                                                                                  13


       There is no change from the proposed rule. The final rule eliminates the requirement that

a voucher agency conduct a reexamination of income whenever a new family member is added,

aligning the voucher and PH regulations.

6. Utility Payment Schedules (§ 982.517)

       For the reasons presented below, HUD has decided against pursuing the regulatory

changes included in the proposed rule that would have authorized a PHA to define “unit type” as

simply “attached” or “detached.”

III. Discussion of Public Comments and HUD’s Responses

       The public comment period on the proposed rule closed on March 9, 2015, and 92 public

comments were received in response to HUD’s January 6, 2015, proposed rule. Comments were

submitted by individual members of the public, Fair Housing advocacy groups, housing

associations, and PHAs. The following presents the significant issues and questions related to the

proposed rule raised by the commenters, and HUD’s responses to these issues and questions.

A. CPD, HCV, MFH, and PH Program Regulations

1. Verification of Social Security Numbers (§ 5.216)

       Issue: Proposal Expansion. Commenters had several suggestions for HUD to expand the

proposed relief, including allowing relief if there is a newly added family member over the age

of six. Others suggested that HUD simply establish a maximum time period during which a

family may receive a subsidy without providing a missing SSN instead of allowing for two

extension periods or that HUD should allow families to self-certify as to having obtained SSNs.

Commenters also stated that the waiver should be allowed only if any enforcement action is

consistent with the Administrative and Continued Occupancy Policy (ACOP) and/or the

Administrative Plan and/or Tenant Selection Plan (TSP).
                                                                                                   14


       HUD Response: Existing regulations permit a participant household to add a new

household member under the age of 6 years, even if that household member lacks an SSN at the

time of admission. The participant household then has 90 days to obtain and provide

documentation necessary to verify the SSN of the new household member; the processing entity

may grant the household an additional 90-day extension. HUD’s intent in proposing changes to

the regulations governing applicants is to align the requirements for applicants with those that

govern participants, including with respect to enforcement. The changes proposed above either

go beyond the current requirements for participant households or vary from those requirements.

As such, they are contrary to HUD’s intent, and HUD declines to adopt them.

       Issue: Expansion to Homeless Programs. Commenters asked HUD to expand the

proposal by providing waivers to allow PHAs to house homeless individuals who are unable to

provide documentation of their SSN by giving the families 90 days to provide the information.

       HUD Response: HUD agrees that adopting similar flexibility with respect to homeless

individuals who lack SSNs would facilitate HUD’s efforts to serve homeless families. However,

HUD is unable to adopt this recommended change at this time, because it is beyond the scope of

this rulemaking.

       Issue: Timing of Waiver. Commenters asked HUD to use the date of voucher issuance

instead of the date of admission, as the date of admission usually means the date of lease-up and

does not account for time for finding a unit and inspections.

       HUD Response: HUD agrees with this comment and has adopted it in this final rule.

       Issue: Objections. Some commenters objected to the proposal, stating that it would

actually increase burden on PHAs. Others asked HUD to modify its systems to properly accept a

delayed certification when there is a new child in the family or when a foster agency refuses to
                                                                                                   15


provide the SSN. Commenters also asked HUD to allow the use of other forms of identification,

such as Individual Taxpayer Identification Numbers.

        HUD Response: Several of the comments provided pertain only indirectly to the changes

proposed by HUD and are therefore beyond the scope of this rulemaking. With respect to the

assertion that this change may result in additional tracking and monitoring, HUD notes that, for

processing entities that typically request waivers in order to house such families, the change

reduces burden. In addition, the change creates benefits that offset any modest burden.

Specifically, they eliminate a barrier that could otherwise prevent families from being housed,

requiring no greater monitoring and tracking than is performed for participant households.

2. Definition of Extremely Low—Income (ELI) Families ($$ 5.603, 903.7, 960.102)

        Issue: Low-Income Families. Commenters stated that the proposed change should not

exclude households from meeting ELI eligibility who are between 30 percent and 50 percent of

area median income (AMI).

        HUD Response: HUD agrees with the comment and has added “very low—income”

language to the final rule.

        Issue: Requested Changes. Commenters stated that because the new definition of ELI has

delayed the release of income limits, the proposal should not be finalized. Similarly, it was

suggested that HUD remove income targeting completely.

        HUD Response: The final rule codifies the definition of ELI in HUD’s 2014

Appropriations Act. The FY 2014 Appropriations Act defines “extremely low-income family” to

mean a very low—income family whose income does not exceed the higher of 30 percent of AMI

or the poverty level. It would be contrary to the statutory change to delay in proceeding with

issuance of this final rule.
                                                                                                    16


       Income targeting is a statutory requirement of section 16 of the 1937 Act and cannot be

removed through rulemaking without statutory authority.

3. Use of Actual Past Income (§ 5.609)

       Issue: Objections to the Proposed Change. Many commenters objected to the proposal’s

requirement that a PHA use one definition of annual income (either actual past income or

projected income) for all families in a program. Also, many commenters objected to the

prohibition against using both the past income provision and the provision authorizing a

streamlined annual reexamination for fixed-income families. Commenters stated that these

restrictions limit PHA discretion and therefore fail to provide administrative savings to PHAs.

       Additionally, commenters stated that the provision did nothing to alleviate the burden

associated with performing interim income reexaminations. The commenters stated that many

families experience fluctuations in income over the course of a year, and that each time this

happens, a housing provider must calculate income based on projected income, rather than past

income. The commenters stated that furthermore, the proposal required housing providers that

adopted a definition based on actual past income to calculate expenses for such things as child

care and medical care during the same 12-month period, and it is difficult to have the same

timeframes for all sources of income.

       Other commenters stated that using past income was not an accurate way to set rent.

       HUD Response: HUD agrees that the proposal provided minimal, if any, streamlining

benefit, and required impractical actions on the part of housing providers in using the same time

frames for income and deductions. Given the concerns raised about the proposal, HUD has

decided not to adopt the use of actual past income in the final rule.

4. Exclusion of Mandatory Education Fees From Income (§ 5.609(b)(9))
                                                                                                              17


        Issue: Requests for Clarification. Some commenters supported the change, but expressed

doubt that this provided streamlining relief and perhaps, instead, added to a PHA’s burden,

particularly in determining the amount of fees charged and then verifying those fees. Others

asked for additional guidance on what fees would fall under this new policy.

        HUD Response: HUD notes that this provision is included in the rule, not as

administrative relief, but to codify in regulation language included in recent appropriations acts

that has excluded from income those amounts needed to pay mandatory student fees.” Additional

guidance from HUD regarding what constitutes such fees is forthcoming in the form of a notice

that relies on the Department of Education definitions of tuition and fees. For example, a

mandatory education fee would include student service fees. That same notice will provide

guidance on how to verify fee information. (Note: Such fees are already excluded for purposes of

the PH program, pursuant to § 5.609(b)(9).)

5. Streamlined Annual Reexamination for Fixed Incomes (8§ 5.657, 960.257, 982.516)

        Issue: Clarifications and Minor Changes. Commenters supported streamlining

reexaminations for families with fixed income, but asked that HUD make some small changes. In

addition to the many requests that HUD permit both fixed-income streamlining and the use of

actual past income, commenters asked that HUD            allow for streamlined reexaminations even

when the family does not have all of its income from fixed-income sources or when some family

members have a variable income and others have a fixed income. Commenters also asked that

either the regulatory definition of “fixed” income be made more flexible or HUD grant PHAs

flexibility to establish their own definition.




> See section 213 of the Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies Appropriations
Act, 2015 (Pub. L. 113-235, approved Dec. 16, 2014).
                                                                                                   18


       HUD Response: As explained above, HUD has dropped the provision that would have

authorized PHAs and owners to define annual income as “actual past income.” At the same time,

in response to comments, HUD has revised this streamlined annual reexamination measure to

provide PHAs and owners with the option of conducting a streamlined income redetermination

for any fixed-income source, irrespective of whether an individual or a family also has a non-

fixed source of income. This means that the regulation no longer requires a family to have 100

percent of its income from fixed sources, which resolves a number of the concerns expressed by

commenters. The final rule also adopts an expanded list of fixed sources of income. With respect

to income from annuities or other retirement benefit programs, insurance policies, disability or

death benefits, or other similar types of periodic receipts, if a family member receives income

from any of these sources and the income consists solely of periodic payments at reasonably

predictable levels, then the income source may be considered to be “fixed.” HUD believes that

these changes respond to a number of the comments received and will provide substantial relief

to PHAs and owners.

       Issue: Objections and Significant Changes. Some commenters stated that the proposal did

not provide any streamlining benefit, and, to fully streamline, HUD should eliminate or modify

the medical expense through methods like a standard deduction or self-certification of medical

expenses. Commenters expressed concern that allowing streamlined recertification for fixed

income families would allow such families to overlook sources of income. Some stated that

HUD   should still require annual income verifications, because some families would have some

members with fixed income and others with variable income.

       HUD Response: While HUD is amenable to adopting several of the suggestions made by

commenters, HUD will not eliminate certain requirements, such as the requirement to verify
                                                                                                    19


medical expenses and otherwise calculate adjustments to annual income for fixed-income

families. For ongoing medical expenses, PHAs and owners already have the option to determine

anticipated expenses by calculating expenses paid by the family in the 12 months preceding

recertification. For past one-time, nonrecurring medical expenses that have been paid in full,

PHAs and owners already have the option of including these expenses at an initial, interim, or

annual recertification; if such an expense has not been paid in full but is instead being paid

subject to a payment plan, then the expense would be counted as anticipated either at the time it

occurs, through an interim recertification, or at an upcoming annual recertification. Further,

HUD will not adopt the use of self-certification of medical expenses and other deductions, due to

the risk of improper payment. Along the same lines, the final rule makes clear that a full

examination of family income must be conducted upon admission to a program. Also, for PHAs

and owners that choose to adopt the streamlined income redetermination, a full examination of

family income must be performed at least every 3 years.

6. Earned Income Disregard ($§ 5.617, 960.255)

       Issue: Definition of “continually employed”    and effect on employment. Several

commenters requested that HUD modify the proposal by clarifying the requirement that the

family remain continually employed.

       In contrast to these commenters, other commenters suggested that this change should not

be made, because residents eligible for EID would not be able to be continually employed for 24

months. Others objected to allowing residents to re-qualify for EID, either because it would

create an additional burden on PHAs or because it could create an incentive for individuals to

leave jobs when the EID expires. Some commenters expressed concern that a family losing the

EID during the 24-month period would be able to qualify for a new EID period immediately,
                                                                                                     20


allowing for an infinite time frame to receive the EID. Commenters also suggested that HUD

allow PHAs the option to allow the EID time clock to run during periods of unemployment but

disregard any unemployment benefits an individual receives.

       HUD Response: HUD has determined to drop the continuous employment requirement

from this rulemaking. For all HUD programs that require an EID, HUD is retaining the ability of

these residents to start and stop employment and still retain the benefit of the EID. However,

these residents may only receive the benefit for up to 24 consecutive months from the date of

initial increase in annual income. If an individual becomes eligible to receive the EID, the 24-

month period will not stop if the circumstance that triggered the EID ceases; however, if the

individual experiences an event that would again provide an EID benefit during the 24-month

period, then the individual will be provided the rent incentive. This change eliminates the

burdensome process of tracking EID starts and stops over a 48-month time period, but still

provides some flexibility to tenants to receive the EID if they again obtain employment.

       HUD will retain the one-time EID eligibility. Specifically, after the expiration of the 24-

month period, individuals will be ineligible to receive subsequent EID benefits. HUD believes

that these changes maintain the balance that HUD seeks to incentivize employment among

residents while reducing the burden of administering the benefit.

       Issue: Exclusion in the second   12 months. Commenters asked that HUD make the income

exclusion 100 percent for the first year and 50 percent for the second 12 months.

       HUD Response: HUD disagrees with this suggestion. The statutory language at section

3(d) of the 1937 Act requires PHAs to disregard 100 percent of any increase in income for the

first 12 months. However, for the second 12 months, PHAs must disregard not less than 50

percent of any increase in income. PHAs have discretion during the second 12-month period to
                                                                                                    21


disregard more than 50      percent of any increase in income. Therefore, HUD will not adopt this

suggested change.

        Issue: Limiting the availability of EID. Commenters suggested that HUD align the EID

effective date with a family’s annual reexamination date. Others suggested that HUD should

allow for income to be calculated using actual past earned income for everyone in lieu of EID, or

that EID should be available only for individuals with disabilities. Commenters also suggested

that HUD should allow PHAs to implement EID on their own reporting cycle.

        HUD Response: HUD’s intent in this rulemaking, with respect to EID, is to streamline

the EID tracking process by reducing the time during which a program participant may be

eligible to receive the benefit of the EID. HUD believes the changes in this rulemaking also more

closely align to the statute that governs the EID. The changes suggested above are inconsistent

either with the statute or with HUD’s intent in this rulemaking. As a result, HUD will not adopt

the suggested changes.

        Issue: Additional guidance. HUD was asked for specific guidance for families that have

already started EID under the previous regulations.

        HUD Response: HUD agrees with this comment and has revised the final regulation to

make clear that the previous regulations apply to such families.

        Issue: HOPWA carve-out. Some commenters stated that allowing HOPWA to have an

EID policy different from other programs with tenant populations that have disabilities is unfair

to the tenants in those non-HOPWA programs.

        HUD Response: HUD agrees with this recommendation and has eliminated the HOPWA

program carve-out in this final rule. The final rule applies the EID uniformly to all families

eligible for the benefit.
                                                                                                     22


        Issue: Elimination of EID, Some commenters suggested HUD should eliminate EID

entirely, either because it clashes with PH’s minimum rent requirement or because the family

self-sufficiency program is better. Others stated that the EID should not be extended to the

Shelter Plus Care and Moderate Rehabilitation/Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) programs. Some

suggested that the EID time period should be limited to only three months to discourage

individuals from quitting jobs at the expiration of the EID time period to avoid rent increases or

that the EID time period should be expanded to 48 months to allow for more gradual rent

increases.

        HUD Response: As noted in response to an earlier comment, HUD’s intent in this

rulemaking, with respect to EID, is to streamline the EID tracking process by reducing the time

during which a program participant may be eligible to receive the benefit of the EID. HUD

believes the changes in this rulemaking more closely align to the statute that governs the EID.

The changes suggested above are inconsistent either with the statute or with HUD’s intent in this

rulemaking. As a result, HUD will not adopt the suggested changes.

B. HCV and PH Program Regulations

1. Family Declaration of Assets Under $5,000 (88 960.259, 982.516)

        Issue: Increasing Threshold. Many commenters asked that HUD increase the maximum

amount of assets that can be self-certified to $10,000.

        HUD Response: The final rule has not adopted this suggestion. The $5,000 amount is

consistent with other policies. Existing regulations require housing providers to calculate the

imputed income for assets over $5,000. Also, the Internal Revenue Service permits housing

credit agencies and owners to accept a certification from families of assets under $5,000.

Commenters stated that there are few residents with assets greater than $5,000.
                                                                                                     23


        Issue: Expansion to Admission. Some commenters asked that HUD modify the proposal

to allow families to use self-certification at both admission and reexamination.

        HUD Response: The final rule clarifies in the preamble that this provision applies to

families at reexamination. At admission, all assets of a family will be verified as is the current

practice. Also, the final rule requires a PHA to obtain third-party documentation of all family

assets every three years.

        Issue: Method of Certification. Commenters asked that HUD allow families to certify to

total assets instead of requiring declaration of each separate asset.

        HUD Response: A family’s declaration of total assets may be included on a single form

with each asset listed. HUD will issue further guidance about this provision of the final rule.

        Issue: Expansion to Multifamily. Commenters asked that HUD allow this provision to

apply to multifamily housing as well.

        HUD Response: The Office of Multifamily Housing Programs, which operates various

rental assistance programs, is issuing an interim final rule to accomplish this expansion.

        Issue: Larger Changes to the Proposal. Some commenters asked that HUD eliminate the

consideration of assets when determining income, as income from assets usually has little, if any,

effect on the amount of rent paid by a family. Other commenters state that self-certification does

not actually reduce burden on PHAs and may actually increase work for PHA staff.

        HUD Response: Totally eliminating consideration of assets when determining income is

outside the scope of this rulemaking. HUD will keep the suggestion in mind as it examines other

opportunities to streamline program requirements.

        Additionally, this provision is optional for PHAs.    A PHA may continue to verify such

assets at both admission and annual reexaminations.
                                                                                                24


2. Utility Reimbursements ($§ 960.253, 982.514)

       Issue: Optional Nature of Provision. Commenters asked that HUD make this policy

optional or allow PHAs to determine the frequency with which they make utility rermbursement

payments. For example, some commenters requested that HUD permit annual reimbursements.

       HUD Response: The changes in this rulemaking are optional, and PHAs that do not

believe this provision is beneficial to their program administration may continue to provide

utility reimbursements monthly. Nothing in this rulemaking permits a PHA not to provide a

utility reimbursement if such a ret1mbursement is due. Nor does the rulemaking offer PHAs the

option of making such payments less frequently than quarterly.

       Issue:   Frequency of Payments. Commenters asked whether the quarterly reimbursement

period would be based on the calendar year or when the family moves in. Others asked for

clarification on whether the payments are reimbursements or future payments.

       HUD Response: The final rule has been modified to clarify that the quarterly periods are

to be based on the calendar year, not the move-in date. However, HUD is not amending other

policies governing when utility reimbursements are sent.

       Issue: Hardship Exemption. Commenters stated that HUD should not allow any hardship

exemption.

       HUD Response: While the proposed rule did not contain a hardship exemption, HUD has

decided for some families, waiting for a quarterly reimbursement amount may be untenable.

Therefore, the final rule now requires that if PHAs make quarterly retmbursements, the PHA

must have a hardship policy in place for tenants.

       Issue: Quarterly Reimbursement Threshold Amount. Commenters requested that HUD

increase to $50 the maximum amount of reimbursements that may be sent quarterly.
                                                                                                     25


            HUD Response: HUD agrees that raising the threshold for quarterly reimbursements will

increase the number of families under this provision and expand the streamlining efforts. While

not raising the amount to $50 per quarter, HUD has raised the threshold to $45 per quarter ($15

per month). Any burden placed on families due to this higher amount is now offset by the

requirement that PHAs opting to issue quarterly utility reimbursements must include a hardship

exemption policy if the quarterly payments impose a financial hardship on families.

            Issue: Alternative Reimbursement Methods. Commenters asked that HUD support options

other than checks for making utility rermbursement payments.

            Some commenters suggested that quarterly reimbursements would not help PHAs that

use automatic deposits onto a debit card.

            HUD Response: HUD supports the use of alternative utility reimbursement methods,

including debit cards. PHAs that choose to use such alternative methods should ensure that such

reimbursement methods do not generate fees that must be paid by the tenant.

            The use of quarterly rermbursement may benefit PHAs that use automatic deposits. If it

does not, then HUD expects that such PHAs will not exercise this option.

            Issue: Elimination of Low Reimbursement Amounts. Commenters asked that HUD

eliminate utility reimbursements that are less than $10 per month or eliminate reimbursements

entirely.

            HUD Response: HUD does not agree that utility reimbursements for amounts less than

$10 per month should be eliminated. The elimination of such reimbursements would violate

sections 3 and 8 of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437a and 1437f), which require that families pay no

more than 30 percent of their annual gross income in rent for their assisted housing. HUD has

determined that such rental payments are for housing and reasonable utilities costs. Therefore,
                                                                                                    26


eliminating a utility reimbursement of any amount would result in some program participants

paying more than the maximum amount of rent that the family should pay. HUD will not adopt

the suggested change.

           Issue: Setting Rents by Income Bands. Commenters stated that the reimbursement burden

would be completely eliminated if rents were solely determined by income bands.

           HUD Response: HUD does not have the statutory authority to permit the use of rents

based on income bands in the PH or HCV programs. Therefore, HUD will not adopt this

suggestion.

           Issue: Direct Payments. Commenters stated that owners should be able to submit utility

payments directly to utility providers.

           HUD Response: This rulemaking does not eliminate the option available to PHAs to

make direct payments to utility providers in lieu of making utility rermbursement payments to

tenants.

           Issue: Prorated Reimbursements. Commenters stated that owners should be given the

option to prorate the utility allowance payment based on any projected move out date; if a

payment has already been disbursed when a tenant moves out, the owner should be allowed to

offset the difference by using the security deposit, charging the resident for the difference, or

adjusting the voucher payment amount.

           HUD Response: This rulemaking requires PHAs to make a prorated utility

reimbursement payment in the case of a family that moves out in advance of the next scheduled

quarterly reimbursement. Likewise, if a family leaves the program with an outstanding credit

from the PHA for a utility reimbursement, the PHA must reconcile the credit with the family

prior to the expiration of the lease, in the case of PH, or when the HAP contract terminates or
                                                                                                    27


shortly thereafter, in the case of the HCV program.

C. PH Program Regulations

1. Public Housing Rents for Mixed Families (§ 5.520(d))

       The comments received on this proposal were all positive and did not urge any changes.

Therefore HUD is adopting the proposal, unchanged in the final rulemaking.

2. Tenant Self-Certification for Community Service and Self-Sufficiency Requirement ($$

960.605, 960.607)

       Issue: Review of Certifications. Several commenters stated that HUD should not require

PHAs to obtain third-party verification when reviewing the self-certifications or should limit the

times when a PHA should follow up with a third party in the review of certifications.

       HUD Response: HUD agrees that it would be unnecessarily burdensome on PHAs to

obtain additional third-party verification when reviewing each self-certification. HUD is not,

therefore, mandating such a process when reviewing tenant self-certifications. PHAs must,

however, review the self-certifications to ensure that they are complete and provide sufficient

information in order to follow up as necessary. Further, HUD strongly encourages PHAs to

investigate community service compliance when there are questions of accuracy. Finally, in a

change from the proposed rule, HUD is requiring PHAs to validate a sample of self-certifications

and notify residents that their self-certifications may be subject to such validation in order to

ensure that residents remain compliant with the community service and self-sufficiency

requirement (CSSR).

       Issue: Objections to Self-Certification. Several commenters objected to the proposal to

allow self-certification, stating that it would reduce compliance with the CSSR.

       HUD Response: While HUD understands the concerns that some residents may attempt
                                                                                                   28


to submit fraudulent self-certifications, the changes permit, but do not require, PHAs to accept a

tenant self-certification of compliance with the CSSR in lieu of obtaining independent third-party

verification. PHAs that are concerned about the potential for fraudulent self-certifications may

continue to require third-party verification of compliance for each eligible resident.

       Issue: Elimination of Community Service Requirement. Several commenters suggested

that it would be better if HUD eliminated the community service requirement for PH entirely.

       HUD Response: The CSSR is mandated by section 12(c) of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C.

1437}(c)). HUD is therefore unable to eliminate the CSSR.

3. Public Housing Grievance Procedures (§§ 966.4 and 966.52 through 966.57)

       Issue: Alignment. Commenters suggested that all grievance procedures should be aligned

across PH, Section 8, and MFH programs. This would allow for only one administrative hearing

for any action. Other commenters suggested applying the revised definition of “hearing officer”

to the HCV program, as well.

       HUD Response: In general, this streamlining rule aligns program requirements where

possible to simplify administration of HUD programs. In the case of the PH program, which in

some cases requires grievance procedures that are beyond what is required under state/local law,

it would be impractical for HUD to seek to fully align the PH program with other HUD rental

assistance programs.

       Issue: Hearing Postponements. Many commenters objected to language in § 966.56(c),

which would limit the timing of any hearing postponements to five days. The commenters stated

that the provision places unnecessary time restrictions, and timeframes should remain at the

discretion of PHAs on a case-by-case basis.
                                                                                                     29


         HUD Response: HUD’s intent in this provision is to clarify, through the use of plain

language, the flexibility afforded to the hearing officer regarding the length of time for which a

hearing may be postponed. The regulatory language was changed from “not to exceed,” to “no

more than.” The change is not substantive, does not reduce the flexibility afforded to the PHA,

and is not disadvantageous to the complainant. The final rule is unchanged from the proposed

rule.

         Issue: Limited English Proficiency (LEP) Requirements. Several commenters expressed

concern with the newly included LEP requirements in § 955.56. The commenters asked whether

a PHA must provide materials in multiple languages, and stated that PHAs should be allowed to

use common sense when providing LEP materials to complainants.

         Other commenters asked that HUD expand the LEP requirements beyond written

materials to include providing translators at various conferences and meetings and materials in

other languages for any notice related to a proposed adverse action. Some commenters stated that

written materials may be inappropriate, as some residents may be illiterate in their spoken

language.

         Some commenters also disagreed with HUD’s placement of the LEP requirements under

a heading of accommodations for persons with disabilities, as limited English proficiency is not a

disability.

         HUD Response: HUD’s intent in this provision is to clarify in the regulations the LEP

requirements already in place for the PH program. On January 22, 2007,° HUD published final

guidance in the Federal Register. This rulemaking does not introduce requirements that are




© See http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2007-01-22/pdf/07-217.pdf.
                                                                                                   30


beyond what is included in HUD’s final LEP guidance. The final rule has been amended to

clarify PHA obligations.

        HUD agrees with the comments regarding the placement of the language, and has moved

the requirement to § 966.56(g).

        Issue: Due Process. Commenters suggested methods to assure due process rights for

complainants, including relying exclusively on local courts or limiting the streamlined process

only for drug activity. Some commenters stated that PHAs should be required to set forth a basic

schedule, including witness lists and supporting documents and limiting the types of testimony a

PHA may introduce without allowing cross-examination of witnesses. Commenters also asked

that HUD provide additional guidance on how flexible a PHA may be with certain procedures, in

order to reduce the exposure of PHAs to legal challenges.

        HUD Response: HUD’s intent in this rulemaking is to remove overly prescriptive process

requirements for PH grievances, where those requirements are not mandated by statute. The

changes proposed above either attempt to maintain or add to existing requirements. The changes

are not consistent with HUD’s intent in this rulemaking; therefore, HUD will not adopt these

suggested changes.

        Issue: Consultation with Residents in Appointing Hearing Officers. Some commenters

expressed concern that the proposal eliminates the requirement for PHAs to consult with

residents in appointing hearing officers, stating that 1t damages residents’ rights to impartial

hearings.

        HUD Response: Requiring a process to consult with residents over the selection of a

hearing officer when PHAs ultimately have the final say about whom to select would be an

unnecessarily burdensome process requirement, and therefore contrary to the intent of this
                                                                                                  3]


rulemaking which is to reduce burden. Further, PHAs still may, but are no longer required to,

consult with residents about the hearing officer. This suggestion would maintain the current

burdensome process and is inconsistent with HUD’s intent in this rulemaking. HUD will not

adopt this suggestion.

        However, in light of these comments, HUD agrees that tenant input into hearing officer

selection process can be valuable. Therefore, HUD is requiring that PHAs include their policies

for selection of hearing officers in the dwelling lease, which is subject to a 30-day comment

period before any changes can be made.

        Issue: Informal Settlements. Commenters asked that HUD continue to require the

summary of informal settlements, stating that HUD could provide a template in order to reduce

administrative burden.

        HUD Response: HUD agrees that there is value in the preparation of the summary, as it

provides an opportunity for both parties to prepare for any forthcoming grievance hearing. As

such, HUD will not change the previous requirement that a summary be prepared. HUD will

explore whether a template summary would be useful at reducing administrative burden for

PHAs.

        Issue: Meeting Recordings and Transcripts. Commenters stated that HUD should still

require PHAs to allow residents to record a meeting and have a transcript made, as elimination

of this requirement doesn’t ease the burden to the PHA, but it eliminates a benefit for future

proceedings.

        HUD Response: HUD agrees with this comment and this final rule reinstates language

making clear that any party to a grievance may arrange to obtain a hearing transcript, at their

Own   expense.
                                                                                                   32


           Issue: Retention of Hearing Officer Decisions. Commenters expressed concern that

HUD was eliminating the requirement that PHAs maintain copies of decisions of hearing

officers. Commenters stated that the records are important to maintaining transparency for

PHAs; the commenters stated that electronic records would reduce burdens for keeping the

records.

           HUD Response: HUD’s regulation at 24 CFR 966.56(b)(1) requires that tenants be

afforded a hearing based on relevant facts related to the specific grievance. HUD disagrees that

prior decisions are necessarily relevant to the individual facts related to a specific grievance

hearing. Further, the retention of such documents is time-consuming and costly for PHAs. The

suggested change is inconsistent with HUD’s intent in this rulemaking, which is to reduce

administrative burden and program costs. Therefore, HUD will not adopt the suggested change.

           However, HUD agrees that basic information related to past hearing decisions could be

useful for HUD oversight and for ensuring transparency in the process. Therefore, in lieu of the

requirement to maintain redacted hearing decisions and making such decisions available to the

public, HUD is requiring that PHAs maintain a simple log, as described in forthcoming HUD

guidance, that provides basic information on past hearing decisions.

           Issue: Informal Hearings. Commenters stated that HUD should reinstate informal

hearings prior to a formal grievance in order to avoid more costly formal hearings whenever

possible.

           HUD Response: This final rulemaking did not eliminate the informal hearing (.e.,

informal settlement of grievance) prior to a formal grievance hearing, as initially proposed.

Requirements related to the informal hearing are contained in 24 CFR 966.54.

           4. Limited Vacancies (§ 990.150)
                                                                                                      33


       Issue: Consistency with local vacancy rates. Commenters stated that PHAs should be

allowed to maintain vacancy rates that are comparable with that of the jurisdiction. Others asked

HUD to set the allowed vacancy rate at not less than 5 percent, as permitted in the LIHTC and

Project-Based Rental Assistance (PBRA) programs.

       HUD Response: The limited vacancy provision allows for funding for vacancies of up to

3 percent. Five other types of approved vacancies are included in the existing regulation related

to particular project circumstances such as modernization, special uses, litigation, disasters, and

casualty losses as well as an appeal provision for vacancies due to changing market conditions.

       Issue: Effect on small agencies. Some commenters objected to new language that the

commenters stated would reduce subsidies to PHAs and could destabilize small agencies. Others

stated that the proposal does not allow for consideration of market conditions or specific local

conditions for small PHAs, which would hurt struggling agencies.

       HUD Response: The proposed language retains the special consideration for PHAs with

100 units or less. HUD’s Public Housing Operating Fund (Operating Fund) regulations continue

to allow for appeals for changing market conditions and specific local condition.

       Issue: Basis for calculation. Commenters asked that vacancies be judged on a PHA-wide

basis to permit balance of high-demand areas with others where there is a low demand, because

one or two vacancies could cause a vacancy rate over 3 percent. The commenters stated that

PHAs should be allowed to manage their portfolio as a single program, similar to the way the

private sector would do so.

       HUD Response: This clarification of the limited vacancy rule retains the approach that

funding is both determined and provided at a project level. The foundation of the transition to

asset management, which was adopted by both PHAs and HUD at the time of promulgation of
                                                                                                  34


the new Operating Fund rule, was for certain PHAs to migrate away from PHA-level

management and funding for those that converted to asset management. Instead, funding,

budgeting, accounting, and management are all conducted at the project level. HUD recognizes

each PHA’s discretion as a property and financial manager of real estate to group buildings to

optimize efficient property management and financial viability. The Operating Fund regulations

and HUD systems currently allow PHAs to group buildings into a project(s) to best serve the

interests of the property and residents.

        Issue: Lag time. Commenters objected to the change because occupancy numbers being

used are 12-18 months in the past, requiring PHAs to operate on non-applicable past information.

        HUD Response: The Operating Fund formula in 24 CFR part 990 is based on use of

historical performance data as a basis to fund current year needs. The clarification of the limited

vacancy language does not modify the tenure of performance data used to calculate Operating

Subsidy eligibility.

        Issue: Negotiated rulemaking. Some commenters stated that HUD should stand by

agreements reached through the negotiated rulemaking process that established the current

operating fund formula.

        HUD Response: The clarification of the limited vacancies provision is consistent with the

negotiated rulemaking process.

5. Flat Rents (§ 960.253)

        Issue: Phase-in of rent increases less than 35 percent. Commenters asked that HUD

reinstate an earlier policy that would allow PHAs to use discretion in implementing any higher

flat rents. This would have allowed PHAs to phase in small flat rent increases—those below 35

percent—over a three-year period.
                                                                                                       35


        HUD Response: The initial discretion for phasing in small increases was due to the fact

that the changes in the 2014 Appropriations Act set all flat rents at 80 percent of FMR, with no

possibilities for exceptions to that amount. HUD received indications that this might be softened

in a future year, permitting PHAs to set flat rents using more localized market data. As a result,

HUD used its discretion to limit the impact of flat rent changes on PHAs and tenants by allowing

the higher rents to be phased in.

        With the passage of the 2015 Appropriations Act, however, HUD believes that PHAs

have sufficient flexibility to set flat rents that reflect the true market value of their units, and

therefore the three-year phase-in for small flat rent increases is unnecessary. However, the

statutory requirement to phase in increases exceeding 35 percent for families already paying flat

rents remains in the rule.

        Issue: Deadline for compliance. Commenters asked HUD to extend the January 1, 2016

deadline for flat rents to take effect.

        HUD Response: This comment misinterprets the effective date of the new flat rent

requirements. HUD did not establish a hard deadline of January 1, 2016 for new flat rents to take

effect. PHAs were already required to establish flat rents at no less than 80 percent of the

applicable FMR as required by PIH Notice 2014-12. That notice clarified that PHAs were

required to update flat rents no later than 90 days after HUD published new, final FMRs. The 90-

day effective date of new flat rents based on new FMRs was also included in the interim rule and

the accompanying guidance provided through notice PIH 2015-13. Once HUD publishes new

final FMRs in any given year, PHAs will be required to update flat rents within 90 days of the

publication of those FMRs and must begin applying them prospectively to new admissions and at

family annual recertifications. In years where HUD takes longer than 12 months between the
                                                                                                      36


publication of new FMRs, PHAs are permitted to continue to charge flat rents at the current

FMR, SAFMR, or approved exception flat rent amount until HUD publishes new FMRs and the

90-day effective date has taken place.

       Issue: Lowering rents when FMRs or SAFMRs decrease. Commenters asked HUD for

additional clarity on the requirements for when market rents decrease, particularly whether PHAs

retain discretion to reduce flat rents when FMRs decrease.

       HUD Response: PHAs must set flat rents at no less than 80 percent of the FMR or

SAFMR, or they may submit an exception request establishing flat rents based on a market

analysis. There is no such requirement limiting a PHA from lowering a flat rent in years where

the FMR or SAFMR      decreases. Therefore, in years where an FMR or SAFMR          decreases, PHAs

have the discretion to lower flat rents, but they may not set flat rents at less than 80 percent of the

FMR or SAFMR unless they submit a new exception request.

       Issue: Rent reasonableness guidance. Commenters suggested that a possible explanation

for why flat rents have been set incorrectly in the past is due to a lack of guidance from HUD on

proper rent reasonableness assessments.

       HUD Response: While that may be true for some PHAs, HUD has heard anecdotally that

there were many reasons why flat rents may not have been set correctly. However, in an effort to

support PHAs when trying to determine the market value of their public housing, HUD will

publish future guidance on rent reasonableness assessments for public housing.

       Issue: Updating rent levels when an exception rent has been requested. Commenters

asked for additional clarification on what the requirements were related to adjusting flat rent

levels when the PHA is intending to submit a request for exception rents.
                                                                                                      37


        HUD Response: In this initial year, any PHAs that submit exception requests prior to the

expiration of the 90-day period after the publication of new FMRs may continue to charge flat

rents at the current levels until the PHA is notified of HUD’s decision on their exception request.

However, if a PHA fails to submit an exception request prior to the expiration of the 90 day

period after the publication of new FMRs, that PHA may still submit an exception request, but

must update flat rents to no less than 80 percent of the FMR or SAFMR until such time that

HUD notifies the PHA of its decision on the exception request.

        Issue: Flat rents and self-sufficiency. Commenters stated that PHAs should have the

discretion to set flat rents lower than 80 percent of market rents in order to encourage families to

become self-sufficient.

        HUD Response: Flat rents themselves are intended to encourage self-sufficiency. They

are a maximum amount of rent that a family could be charged; once a family begins to pay flat

rent, any increases in income do not have an effect on their rental payment. Because families

have the ability to choose between paying an income-based rent or a flat rent, families that

choose to pay flat rents are inevitably paying a lower percentage of income than other public

housing households which is a self-sufficiency incentive. Therefore, HUD      does not believe that

any additional discretion regarding flat rents is necessary to encourage economic self-

sufficiency.

        Issue: Reduced exception rent requests. Commenters asked that PHAs only be required to

submit exception rent requests every three years instead of annually.

        HUD Response: HUD is bound by the statutory framework, which stipulates that

exception requests must be submitted if the applicable FMR or SAFMR do not reflect the market

value of a property. As such, the statute requires   a comparison of the FMR or SAFMR to a
                                                                                                    38


current market study in order to determine whether the market value of a property is less than the

current FMR or SAFMR. Therefore, HUD does not have the authority to permit PHAs to use

market studies that are not current for exception requests.

       Issue: LIHTC rents and public housing flat rents. Commenters asked for additional

clarity on how the flat rents regulation impacts the LIHTC rents.

       HUD Response: PHAs that manage public housing units that were developed or

modernized using LIHTC must set maximum rents for such units at the required maximum

LIHTC rents, even if this is lower than the minimum flat rent amount for a particular unit.

       Issue: Opposition. Several commenters objected to the flat rent policy entirely, stating

that it would increase rent burden, cause higher turnover, and negatively impact tenant

employment.

       HUD Response: Although HUD recognizes that there are consequences to changes in flat

rents, HUD believes that the changes included in the FY 15 Appropriations Act, which have

been included in this rulemaking, provide sufficient flexibility to PHAs to set accurate, market-

based rents. Further, tenants concerned about rent burden are reminded that they are provided a

safeguard in this rulemaking from large annual increases in rent, and they are always able to

elect to pay the income-based rent which is set at 30 percent of income.

D. HCV Program Regulations

1. Start of Assisted Tenancy (§ 982.309)

       Issue: Objections. Many commenters objected to this proposal, stating that landlords seek

to lease units as quickly as possible, and this could delay tenants from being able to move into

their units. In high-demand areas, this could reduce the number of landlords willing to participate

in the voucher program, limiting choice to voucher holders. Many commenters also expressed
                                                                                                     39


concern that this would have negative consequences for families that need to move immediately

or alternatively would cause tenants to have to move out of a unit before being able to move into

a new one. Other commenters stated that this would concentrate administrative tasks into a single

time of the month for PHAs, actually increasing their burden.

       HUD Response: HUD has decided against promulgating this change. Several

commenters favored the proposed change, but input from groups ranging from landlords to

tenant advocates suggested that the change would have an adverse effect on the ability of HCV-

assisted tenants to access housing. While the proposed change would have been optional at the

discretion of the PHA, and HUD estimates that PHAs would choose not to adopt any measure

that would make it more difficult for   HC V-assisted tenants to access housing, HUD ultimately

decided that it could move forward with the change only if it also required any PHA opting to

implement the provision to also put into place an exception policy for certain families (e.g.,

victims of domestic violence) or situations (e.g., HAP terminations due to HQS violations).

Ultimately, requiring the adoption of an exception policy would counter any administrative relief

provided by implementing the proposed change. Taking all of these factors into consideration,

HUD declines to include this provision in this final rule.

2. Biennial Inspections and the Use of Alternative Inspection Methods ($§ 982.405, 983.103)

       Issue:   HUD Systems. Commenters suggested ways that HUD could improve its

inspection procedures. Some commenters suggested that the electronic systems be updated for

biennial inspections, and others asked for a centralized database for inspection reports and data,

which could then be accessed by PHAs in order to obtain the results of alternative inspection

methods. Some commenters stated that HUD should review inspection protocols with input from
                                                                                                   40


PHAs and implement “best practices” across the board. Commenters also asked for consolidating

inspection standards between HUD programs and LIHTC.

        HUD Response: While these comments are helpful in that they specify improvements to

HUD systems that would simplify the inspection process, advise of the burden that results from

differences in inspection protocols and standards, and point out at least one way in which an

expansion of this provision could bring about further streamlining, they are either beyond the

scope of this rulemaking or would require statutory changes.

        In addition, HUD’s information technology investment decisions are made enterprise-

wide based on available resources as appropriated by Congress. HUD will explore ways to move

to electronic reporting systems with available resources. In particular, HUD is considering the

creation of a national-level affordable housing database that could be utilized in the way

described.

        Issue: Keep Proposal Optional. Some commenters stated that PHAs may want to inspect

properties more frequently for oversight purposes, and therefore asked that biennial and

alternative inspections remain optional for PHAs.

        HUD Response: As authorized by Congress and proposed in this rulemaking, the use of

biennial inspections is at the discretion of the PHA; PHAs will retain the discretion to inspect

annually any properties that warrant more frequent attention. The same is true of alternative

inspection methods—their use is entirely at the discretion of the PHA, per the statute and this

rulemaking. Nothing in this final rule requires a PHA to adopt biennial inspections or alternative

inspection methods.

        Issue: Remediation Protocols. Commenters offered several suggestions on how to

remediate problems identified by alternative inspections. Some stated that HUD should allow
                                                                                                     Al


PHAs to rely upon the remediation protocol of the alternative inspection method; there would be

no burden relief if PHAs have to conduct HQS inspections anyway for units that failed the

alternative inspection the first ttme. Some commenters suggested that this could be satisfied by

providing HUD with a certification from the inspecting agency that the deficiencies have been

mitigated. Commenters stated that HUD should allow PHAs to decide if they will conduct a

remedial HQS inspection or rely on the owner to provide proof of actions to remedy defects.

        HUD Response: HUD is sympathetic to the suggestion that any streamlining benefit of

this provision is offset by the requirement that a PHA inspect a property using HQS when the

property has already been inspected using an alternative inspection method and such method

reveals the existence of violations that would have resulted in a “fail” score under HQS. For an

alternative inspection method that employs sampling, however, as is the case with inspections of

properties subsidized with LIHTCs, any cited deficiencies that would ultimately be corrected

may exist as well in units not included in the sample, including units occupied by HCV-assisted

households. HUD has an obligation to determine whether such deficiencies exist in units

occupied by such households and, if they do, to assure that the units are once again brought into

compliance with HUD’s housing quality standards.

        PHAs are only precluded from relying on an alternative inspection method if a property

inspected pursuant to the method fails an inspection. In all cases where a property passes an

inspection, even if deficiencies are identified,   a PHA may rely upon the alternative inspection

method to demonstrate compliance with HUD’s housing quality standards. If a property fails an

inspection due to identified deficiencies, it may be the case that remedial actions taken pursuant

to the alternative inspection method fall short of what would be required under HUD’s housing

quality standards.
                                                                                                    42


       In any circumstance in which a PHA is prohibited from relying on an alternative

inspection method, HUD     declines, for the reasons identified above, to adopt alternative

remediation measures as a substitute for a PHA’s determination that a unit occupied by an HCV-

assisted family meets the requirements for occupancy and funding under the HCV program.

       Issue: Reinspection Sampling. In the case of residents with tenant-based vouchers living

in mixed-finance properties, commenters stated that HUD should authorize biennial inspection of

arandom sample of units consisting of at least 20 percent of the contract units in each building.

       HUD Response: Congress specifically authorized the use of alternative inspections,

including inspections conducted pursuant to requirements under the low-income housing tax

credit (LIHTC) program. The LIHTC program employs sampling.            A PHA may adopt an

alternative inspection method that is specifically authorized by Congress or approved by HUD

and employs sampling.

       Issue: Alternative Inspection Standards. Commenters suggested that HUD require HUD’s

Real Estate Assessment Center (REAC) to approve or disapprove a PHA’s certification that an

alternative inspection method meets HUD standards prior to allowing the PHA to employ the

alternative inspection method.

       HUD Response: HUD has adopted this suggestion in this final rulemaking.

       Issue: Local Jurisdiction Inspections. Commenters asked that HUD allow PHAs to use

inspections done for local jurisdictions, even when the inspections are done by local agencies.

       HUD Response: The statute authorizes PHAs to rely on inspections conducted under a

“Federal, state, or local housing program.” HUD interprets a “local housing program” to include

a local housing code. Subject to the conditions established in this final rule,   a PHA may rely

upon an inspection conducted pursuant to a local housing code to meet its obligation to inspect
                                                                                                     43


units occupied by HCV-assisted tenants during the course of a housing assistance payments

contract. In order to rely upon such an inspection,   a PHA must submit a copy of the local

housing code to HUD, along with an analysis by the PHA showing that the local housing code

standard meets or exceeds HQS. Once HUD has reviewed these materials, and then only if HUD

approves use of the inspection method, the PHA may rely upon it. The PHA must certify

annually to HUD that the local housing code has not changed; if it has changed, then the PHA

must again obtain HUD approval to rely upon the standard, submitting a copy of the revised code

and an analysis showing that the revised standard meets or exceeds HQS.

        Issue: Objections. Some commenters expressed dissatisfaction with the proposal,

particularly with alternative inspections, and stated that HUD   should not continue with the

proposal.

        HUD Response: HUD is required by law to implement biennial inspections and

inspections via alternative inspection methods.

3. Housing Quality Standards (HOS) Reinspection Fees (§ 982.405)

        Issue: Burden on PHAs and Deterrence to Landlords. Some commenters objected to

the proposal, stating that landlords would be reluctant to pay reinspection fees and would

therefore be deterred from participating in the Section 8 program. Others stated that charging

fees to landlords would be a burden to PHAs, and therefore should remain optional and up to

the PHA to decide how to implement.

        HUD Response: The proposed change made it optional for a PHA to charge a

reinspection fee, and this final rule retains the optional nature of the provision. If a PHA has a

concern that charging a fee may deter landlords from participating in the program or may

result in additional work (i.e., securing payment of a fee, once assessed), then the PHA will
                                                                                                  4A

want to take these factors into consideration when determining whether to impose a

reinspection fee. As long as a PHA complies with the requirements of this regulation when

imposing a reinspection fee, nothing in this regulation would constrain a PHA from adopting

local policies specific to the administration of such a fee. For example,   a PHA could specify

in its Administrative Plan that an owner will be charged a reinspection fee only after a second

reinspection reveals that the defect persists. PHAs will need to determine whether and how

best to use this reinspection fee authority, based upon their local circumstances.

       Issue: Use of     Fees and When to Charge. Some commenters suggested that the

collected fees be added to administrative fee amounts available to a PHA.

       HUD Response:       Fees will be included in a PHA’s administrative fee reserve and may

be used only for activities related to the provision of Section 8 tenant-based assistance.

       Issue: Guidance. Several commenters asked HUD to provide additional guidance on

what constitutes a “reasonable” fee; such guidance will be necessary to reduce PHA

administrative burden.

       HUD Response: HUD will issue guidance on what constitutes a “reasonable” fee.

       Issue: When Charges May Be Assessed. Commenters asked that HUD clarify the

proposal to avoid charges for full HQS inspections instead of merely for reinspections of

previously identified deficiencies. Others asked for information on how the proposal would

relate to special inspections that are not initial or regularly scheduled inspections, or what

would happen if a landlord or tenant does not attend or allow entrance for the inspection.

Commenters also asked that HUD expand the proposal to allow for the charging of fees even

when a landlord has not indicated deficiencies have been corrected, when the allotted time for

repairs has expired but a pre-scheduled reinspection reveals the repairs have not been made.
                                                                                                  45


       HUD Response: The final rule makes clear that a fee may be assessed under two

circumstances: first, if a landlord affirms that a repair has been made and a subsequent

reinspection shows that it has not and, second, when the allotted period of time for making the

repair has lapsed and a reinspection shows that the repair has not been made, whether or not

the landlord has affirmed that it was.

       Issue: Expansion of Proposal. Some commenters also suggested that HUD expand the

proposal to allow for fees for all reinspections. Others stated that PHAs should be allowed to

redirect funds from abated rents to cover the costs of inspections instead of charging fees.

Finally, commenters stated that HUD should consider other incentives for landlords, such as

allowing tenants to pay rent into repair escrow accounts.

       HUD Response: HUD appreciates these suggestions and observations but has declined to

adopt them as part of this rulemaking.

4. Exception Payment Standards for Providing Reasonable Accommodations ($§ 982.503,

982.505)

       Issue: Unit Special Features. Commenters stated that HUD should include a

consideration of special features of the unit when establishing a reasonable rent between 110

percent and 120 percent of area fair market rent (FMR).

       HUD Response: There was strong support for retaining this provision unchanged, and

HUD has done so.     A PHA must take special features into consideration when there is a

reasonable accommodation request. In accordance with 24 CFR part 8, a PHA must provide a

higher payment standard if requested as a reasonable accommodation for a family that includes

an individual with disabilities. HUD’s regulation implementing section 504 of the Rehabilitation

Act, at 24 CFR part 8, is referenced in 24 CFR 982.505(d). In addition, under 24 CFR 8.28(a)(3),
                                                                                                      46

PHAs are already required, when issuing a voucher to a family that includes an individual with

disabilities, to assist the family in locating an available, accessible dwelling unit. For example,

PHAs are required to provide a current listing of available units known to the PHA.

       Issue: HAP Funding. Commenters stated that PHAs will be challenged to provide higher

payment standards when HAP funding is already constrained.

       HUD Response: HUD acknowledges the concerns about funding constraints. PHAs are

nonetheless required to assist families that include an individual with disabilities, including by

providing a higher payment standard as a reasonable accommodation, if the family requests such

an accommodation and it is necessary in order for the family to obtain suitable housing.

5. Family Income and Composition: Reeular and Interim Examinations ($ 982.516(c)-(e))

       Issue: Timing of Interim Examinations. Commenters supported this proposal, but also

asked that it remain optional for PHAs. Some asked for further clarification from HUD regarding

whether a PHA is required to conduct an interim examination when a family member is added,

and at what point such an examination might be required. Several commenters also pointed out

that the new proposed language did not align regulations between the PH and Section 8

programs.

       HUD Response: HUD agrees with providing clarity to the proposed change to 24 CFR

982.516. With the removal of paragraph (e) (“Family member income’), HUD is removing from

part 982 the requirement that a PHA perform an interim examination whenever a new family

member is added. The corresponding regulation for the PH program (24 CFR 960.257) contains

no such requirement. The removal of paragraph (e) from § 982.516 provides HUD with the

opportunity to issue uniform guidance on interims—in other words, guidance that will apply to

both the PH and HCV programs. Having reviewed data on the reasons for which interims are
                                                                                                     47


requested and considering a number of alternatives, including establishing thresholds below

which PHAs would not be required to conduct inter1ms, HUD determined that the greatest

potential for streamlining lies in issuing uniform guidance. Other options either created their own

administrative challenges and/or had the potential to have a negative effect on program

participants. For example, authorizing PHAs to limit interims to circumstances in which a

change in family income or composition would result in a rent increase of some threshold dollar

amount would require PHAs to determine whether the threshold had been met, which would in

itself be a burdensome exercise. At the same time, a finding that the threshold had not been met,

resulting in no change to a family’s rent, could place a burden on tenants.

       Issue: Discretion and Threshold Amounts. Several commenters requested that HUD

continue to leave policies regarding recertifications up to the discretion of PHAs.

       HUD Response: Nothing in this final rule alters PHA discretion with respect to interims.

6. Utility Payment Schedules (§ 982.517)

       Issue: Objections to the Proposal. Many commenters objected to the proposal to

consolidate the utility payment schedules. Some commenters stated that the definition of

“attached” and “detached” are unclear, and HUD should provide additional information. Other

commenters stated that consolidating the schedules would penalize tenants in certain types of units

because energy use is not always comparable under such broad categories. Some commenters

suggested that the proposal could raise fair housing issues by impacting larger families in multi-

bedroom units. Others stated that the proposed 60-day notice was insufficient to protect tenants

from decreased utility allowances.
                                                                                                         48


        Some commenters stated that, in areas served by more than one PHA, perhaps with

differing policies on how to define unit types, the proposal would create confusion for program

applicants and participants.

        HUD Response: Considering the totality of the comments submitted on the proposal to

authorize PHAs to establish utility payment schedules that limit “unit type” to either “attached” or

“detached,” HUD has decided against adopting this provision. HUD acknowledges comments that

the proposal may have an unintended and inequitable effect on certain households, and believes

this issue merits additional analysis in order to determine the extent to which these outcomes may

occur and to weigh those outcomes against the benefits of streamlining. In addition, comments

focused on jurisdictional questions caused HUD to realize that the proposal could create

confusion—for program applicants, especially—in the event PHAs with overlapping          jurisdictions

opted to adopt different definitions of “unit type” (i.e., one relying on the traditional method and

the other choosing to define unit type as either “attached” or “detached”’).

        Issue: Broader Utility Allowance Changes. Commenters asked HUD to consider broader

changes to utility allowances. Commenters suggested that HUD completely eliminate utility

allowance schedules or allow flat utility allowances based on average per-bedroom size or

household size. Others suggested that HUD provide an annual utility cost adjustment factor for

each locale instead of requiring PHAs to calculate utility costs on their own. Finally, some

commenters suggested that HUD establish a more equitable utility subsidy approach, accounting

for other forms of assistance, such as utility caps or utility credits.

        HUD Response: Based on comments received, HUD recognizes that having a holistic

look at utility allowance calculations may be merited. Should HUD initiate such a review, these
                                                                                                  49


comments will be taken into consideration. The suggestions are, however, beyond the scope of

this rulemaking.

E. Other Comments

       In addition to comments on specific proposals, commenters also suggested regulatory and

other changes that HUD could make for streamlining and other burden-reducing benefits.

1. Enterprise Income Verification (EIV)/Information Verification


       Issue: EIV Reports. Some commenters suggested that certain reports (e.g., New Hires,

New Move-In, Income Discrepancy) should not be used as frequently, if at all. The commenters

suggested that, to the extent such reports provide useful information, the information could be

gathered at other times or using other methods.

       HUD Response: HUD appreciates the comments regarding the use of the various EIV

reports. HUD understands that the information generated through some reports may reflect

delayed information. However, EIV has significantly reduced improper payments in HUD’s

programs, and these reports help PHAs and HUD to monitor program participants and address

discrepancies in a timely manner. Further, changes to EIV are beyond the scope of this

rulemaking.

       Issue: EIV Use and Expansion. Many commenters suggested that HUD modify the EIV

system by adding additional income sources, including past income, in the system or allowing

verification of SSNs through EIV. Other commenters suggested that HUD consider alternatives

to EIV, such as the Work Number or cooperative agreements with state agencies. Finally,

commenters asked for more frequent updates to EIV.

       HUD Response: HUD appreciates the comments about how to improve or supplement

EIV; however, these suggestions are outside of the scope of this rulemaking.
                                                                                                      50


2. Income Determinations and Rent Settings


       Issue: Calculation of Income. Commenters offered suggestions on ways that they stated

would be easier to calculate tenant income and rent. Some stated that HUD should base rents on

gross income, rather than adjusted income. Others suggested that HUD modify the process for

deducting medical expenses from income by using past expenses or a standard deduction. A

standard childcare deduction was also proposed. One commenter suggested that HUD consider

the automation-based process for certification and verification incorporated by the Affordable

Care Act.

       Commenters also asked HUD to allow for less frequent income reexaminations, either on

a biennial or a triennial basis. This change could be authorized based on family type (.e., elderly,

disabled) or family income status (1.e., extremely low—income, very low-income).

       Some commenters requested an increase in the minimum rent or that HUD reinstate the

“frozen rental income” regulation provision to encourage tenants to have earned income. Others

asked that HUD consider limiting the inclusion of assets by only including actual income from

assets or only including assets disposed of for less than fair market value for assets over a given

threshold. Some stated that HUD should count assets disposed of since the two previous annual

reexaminations instead of the previous two years.

       Commenters stated that HUD      should not allow tenants to claim no income, but instead

should require that all tenants maintain a minimum income.

       Finally, commenters stated that PHAs should not be required to conduct rent

reasonableness determinations when a PHA is using a fair market rent determined by HUD or

when a proposed rent has already been approved by HUD or its administrator.
                                                                                                      51


       HUD Response: HUD requested comments from the public about other opportunities to

align requirements across programs, and HUD appreciates receiving these additional comments.

Some of the suggestions are outside the scope of this rulemaking or would require statutory

change. However, HUD will consider these suggestions for future streamlining changes.

        HUD has taken actions on other suggestions. HUD’s FY 2016 budget proposes three-year

recertification of income for fixed income families, increasing the threshold for deduction of

medical and related care expenses, and a Utilities Conservation Pilot that would make it easier for

PHAs to access energy incentives from energy investments. Also, HUD is conducting a rent

reform demonstration to compare the current rent structure in subsidized housing to an alternate

structure in terms of impact on household employment, earnings, hardship, homelessness, and on

simplification and cost of PHA administrative processes.

3. Fees and Payments


       Issue:   Funding and Improper Payments. Many commenters provided suggestions on how

to improve and streamline payments to owners and PHAs. Several suggested increased funding for

administrative fees or physical inspections. Other commenters stated that HUD should permit

voucher HAP reserves to be used for administrative purposes when the administrative fee proration

is below 90 percent.

        Some commenters requested HUD freeze the rolling utility base to allow PHAs to recoup

savings from energy conservation methods. Others asked HUD to allow expedited implementation

of lower payment standards in the voucher programs. Several commenters suggested that HUD

revise its process for determining project expense levels, accounting for the age of properties and

using the negotiated rulemaking inflation factor. One commenter stated that HUD should permit

rent increases to owners in the HCV program only on a contract anniversary date.
                                                                                                    52


        Commenters also provided suggestions on reforming improper payment procedures. A

commenter asked that HUD not require owners to provide proof of the costs involved in recovering

improper payments. Commenters also suggested that HUD not specify what makes repayment of

improper payments “affordable” to residents, as the current definition is confusing and leads to

extra work for staff.

        HUD Response: As is the case on HUD’s response to the preceding issue, many of the

comments are outside the scope of this rulemaking or would require action by Congress, but HUD

will consider these for future streamlining changes. With respect to freezing the rolling base to

allow PHAs to recoup savings from energy conservation methods, this is permitted now when a

PHA has entered into an energy performance contract.

4, Miscellaneous   Suggestions


        Issue: Broader Streamlining and Other Suggestions. Many commenters had specific

suggestions on how to align requirements and processes across programs. Some suggested that

HUD use the Public Housing Administrative Reform Initiative to find some additional

streamlining suggestions. Others stated that HUD should have just a single entity review grantee

compliance with various program requirements instead of allowing multiple agencies to have

oversight.

        Some commenters asked HUD to modify inspection protocols, including by explicitly

stating that a physical reinspection of deficiencies is not required. Others stated that HUD should

not use the Uniform Physical Conditions Standards for HCV, but should continue to use the

HQS. Commenters further asked that HUD reconsider the requirement that failed HQS items be

reinspected prior to the HAP contract effective date, instead allowing families to move in while

the owner has 30 days to repair the failed items.
                                                                                                  53


        Commenters also stated that HUD should limit requirements under section 3 of the 1937

Act to only programs under the Office of Housing. Others asked that HUD institute a threshold

of activity below which Section 3 requirements would not apply.

        Some commenters asked that eligibility and reporting procedures be standardized across

housing programs both in HUD and across other Federal agencies. Others stated that HUD

should extend the zero-subsidy time limit for voucher holders to align policies between the

voucher and PBRA programs. Many commenters also stated that HUD should allow PHAs the

discretion on whether or not to require community service in PH, as it is not required in other

HUD programs.

       A commenter stated that HUD should incorporate policies from the Multifamily

Handbook into the PH and voucher programs to provide additional information on how a PHA

should consider a tenant family’s circumstances when they fail to recertify in a timely manner.

        Some commenters stated that HUD should allow PHAs to be eligible for Housing Trust

Fund money for PH rehabilitation. Others asked that HUD clarify that PHAs with 250 or more

units of PH are still able to use operating reserves for capital improvements.

        Commenters also asked for clarity on the HCV Tenancy Addendum and on qualifying for

the Capital Fund Activity exclusion for environmental assessments.

       HUD Response: HUD will take these suggestions into consideration as it seeks to identify

additional opportunities to reduce the administrative burden on PHAs and owners and to align

the requirements across programs, where feasible. The majority of these suggestions is beyond

the scope of this rulemaking, or would require statutory change. However, for others, HUD can

address through administrative guidance. With respect to the suggestion that HUD thoroughly

review the final report of the Public Housing Administrative Reform Initiative, this report is
                                                                                                    54


among the documents initially reviewed by HUD’s streamlining working group, which

ultimately initiated this rulemaking.

       Issue: Regulatory Relief in Property Assessment. Several commenters asked HUD to

suspend PHA plan requirements or for a moratorium on the Physical Needs Assessment.

Commenters asked for waivers of asset management regulations affecting funding, such as cash

transfers between properties, fee caps, and Asset Management Project (AMP) configurations.

Commenters further asked for broad waivers under 24 CFR part 5 and for the Public Housing

Assessment System and Section Eight Management Assessment Program to be advisory only for

non-statutory items. Finally, commenters stated that HUD should ensure that PHAs are fully

trained before any changes go into effect.

       HUD Response: HUD remains interested in identifying opportunities to reduce the burden

on PHAs, owners, and grantees that administer rental assistance. While the suggestions provided

here are outside the scope of this rulemaking, they are helpful in identifying for HUD areas on

which to focus attention. HUD will continue to look for opportunities to streamline and simplify

the administration of its programs, and to align the requirements across programs, to the extent

feasible and reasonable, applying the same lens to future proposals as it employed for this

rulemaking effort. Specifically, any proposal to relieve the administrative burden on PHAs,

owners, and grantees will need to be balanced against important tenant protections and HUD’s

obligation to provide program oversight. With respect to guidance and training, HUD is aware that

PHAs, owners, and grantees may have questions about how best to implement several of the

provisions in this rule. HUD will provide opportunities to address those questions, through

additional written guidance, training, and other means that enable HUD to respond to requests for

information.
                                                                                                   55


        Issue: Statutory Changes. Commenters requested changes that they acknowledged would

require congressional action. These proposals include an earned income deduction for all

families, eliminating voucher portability, expanding Moving to Work, the Small Housing

Authority Reform Proposal, triennial recertification for fixed-income families, increasing the flat

deduction for elderly families or persons with disabilities, increasing the medical expense

deduction, or eliminating eligibility differences among programs.

        HUD Response: For several of these suggestions, HUD has previously sought statutory

change. In its FY14 budget proposal, for example, HUD included several statutory changes that

were ultimately enacted by Congress and have now been implemented with the publication of this

final rule. HUD will continue to look for opportunities to streamline and simplify the

administration of its programs, and to align the requirements across programs, to the extent feasible

and reasonable, applying the same lens to future proposals as it employed for this rulemaking

effort. Specifically, any proposal to relieve the administrative burden on PHAs and owners will

need to be balanced against important tenant protections and HUD’s obligation to provide program

oversight.

IV. Findings and Certifications

Executive Orders 12866 and 13563, Regulatory Planning and Review

        Under Executive Order 12866 (Regulatory Planning and Review), a determination must

be made whether a regulatory action is significant and, therefore, subject to review by the Office

of Management and Budget (OMB) in accordance with the requirements of the order. Executive

Order 13563 (improving Regulation and Regulatory Review) directs executive agencies to

analyze regulations that are “outmoded, ineffective, insufficient, or excessively burdensome, and

to modify, streamline, expand, or repeal them in accordance with what has been learned.”
                                                                                                     56


Executive Order 13563 also directs that where relevant, feasible, and consistent with regulatory

objectives, and to the extent permitted by law, agencies are to identify and consider regulatory

approaches that reduce burdens and maintain flexibility and freedom of choice for the public.

This rule was determined to be a “significant regulatory action” as defined in section 3(f) of

Executive Order 12866 (although not an economically significant regulatory action, as provided

under section 3(f)(1) of the Executive Order).

       As already discussed in this preamble, the regulatory changes by this streamlining rule

are designed to reduce administrative burdens on PHAs, enable PHAs to better target assistance

to families, and reduce Federal costs. Some of the changes in this rule are due to statutory

changes enacted in the FY 2014 Appropriations Act and have specific estimates of financial

savings that may be expected (specifically the change in the definition of “extremely low-

income” and the cap on the utility allowance). Other changes (biennial inspections, streamlining

income recertifications) may have estimates on savings generated by Moving-to-Work (MTW)

agencies that already implemented such flexibilities. Some provisions of this rule, however,

focus solely on providing or revising regulatory provisions that reduce administrative burdens on

PHAs, but that are optional for PHAs to utilize. Consequently HUD is unable to quantify costs

and benefits for this rule overall because of the flexibility provided.

       The rule provides PHAs with the discretion as to whether they will implement those

regulations that provide alternatives means of implementing several required administrative

actions. HUD recognized that there is a need for greater flexibility for PHAs to operate programs

that fit their communities and to use savings generated in time from these provisions to better

focus resources on their operational priorities. However, savings are difficult to estimate as the

changes are not mandatory. HUD’s FY2015 budget estimated Federal savings for two of the
                                                                                                    57


provisions, changing the definition of “extremely low-income” and placing a cap on the utility

allowance. HUD’s budget did not contain savings estimates for other provisions which would

yield efficiencies for PHAs, not HUD. For the provision permitting biennial inspections, savings

data comes from Moving-to-Work (MTW) agencies experiences and reporting.

           In FY2015, HUD    estimated that the revised definition of extremely-low income will

reduce Federal costs by an estimated $155 million. The change increases access to HUD rental

assistance for working poor families, in rural areas in particular. In such areas, median incomes

are often so low that families with a fulltime worker have incomes that exceed 30 percent of

AMI, even though the families remain below the Federal poverty level. In the voucher program

in particular, where 75 percent of vouchers issued each year must be targeted to ELI families,

this change will enable more working poor families to qualify for voucher assistance.

           Additionally, HUD estimated in its FY2015 budget that limiting the utility allowance

payment for tenant-based vouchers to the family unit size for which the voucher is issued,

irrespective of the size of the unit rented by the family, will generate estimated savings of $50

million.

           Permitting biennial inspections for HCV units will reduce the administrative and

financial burden on PHAs and high-performing landlords and enable PHAs to concentrate their

inspection resources on the more marginal and higher-risk units. Of the 34 MTW agencies, 23

have adopted or proposed to adopt biennial inspection schedules. The Cambridge Housing

Authority estimated a net savings of $122,234, or more than 3,737 hours of staff time in 2014

compared to 2008. The Housing Authority of the County of San Mateo reduced the number of

inspections to approximately 2,086 annually from 4,172 and reported savings of $52,150 in
                                                                                                   58


inspection costs. HUD believes that PHAs adopting this flexibility will experience similar

Savings in time and costs.

       Determining the complete amount of financial and time savings for this rule is difficult

because, as noted, the majority of the provisions are discretionary for PHAs, and HUD believes

that each PHA will evaluate its own circumstances in financing and staffing and adopt those

provisions that are most cost-effective for them.

Executive Order 13132, Federalism

       Executive Order 13132 (entitled “Federalism”) prohibits an agency from publishing any

rule that has federalism implications if the rule either imposes substantial direct compliance costs

on state and local governments and is not required by statute, or the rule preempts state law,

unless the agency meets the consultation and funding requirements of section 6 of the Executive

Order. This final rule does not have federalism implications and does not impose substantial

direct compliance costs on state and local governments nor preempt state law within the meaning

of the Executive Order.

Regulatory Flexibility Act


       The Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA) (5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) generally requires an agency

to conduct a regulatory flexibility analysis of any rule subject to notice and comment rulemaking

requirements, unless the agency certifies that the rule will not have a significant economic

impact on a substantial number of small entities. This rule reduces the administrative burden on

PHAs, MFH owners, and certain CPD grantees in many aspects of administering assisted

housing. Such PHAs, MFH      owners, and CPD grantees, regardless of size, will benefit from the

burden reduction proposed by this rule. These revisions impose no significant economic impact

on a substantial number of small entities. As discussed above, many of the new provisions are
                                                                                                       59


voluntary, and each PHA or MFH owner will be able to adopt the streamlining provisions that

offer the greatest benefit to them, further reducing any negative effects on small entities.

Therefore, the undersigned certifies that this rule will not have a significant impact on a

substantial number of small entities.

Environmental Impact


       A Finding of No Significant Impact with respect to the environment was made on the

proposed rule in accordance with HUD regulations in 24 CFR part 50 that implement section

102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C)). The

Finding remains applicable to this final rule. The Finding is available for public inspection

during regular business hours in the Regulations Division, Office of General Counsel,

Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 7th Street, SW, Room 10276, Washington,

DC 20410-0500. Due to security measures at the HUD Headquarters building, please schedule

an appointment to review the Finding by calling the Regulations Division at 202—708—3055 (this

is not a toll-free number). Individuals with speech or hearing impairments may access this

number via TTY by calling the Federal Information Relay Service at 800-877-8339.

Unfunded Mandates Reform Act

       Title II of the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (UMRA)           establishes

requirements for federal agencies to assess the effects of their regulatory actions on state, local,

and tribal governments and the private sector. This rule will not impose any federal mandates on

any state, local, or tribal governments or the private sector within the meaning of UMRA.

Paperwork Reduction Act


       The information collection requirements contained in this proposed rule have been

approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the Paperwork Reduction Act
                                                                                                 60


of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501-3520) and assigned OMB        control numbers 2577—0220 and 0169. In

accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, an agency may not conduct or sponsor,

and a person is not required to respond to, a collection of information, unless the collection

displays a currently valid OMB control number.

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance


       The Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance numbers applicable to the programs that

would be affected by this rule are: 14.103, 14.123, 14.135, 14.149, 14.157, 14.181, 14.195,

14.235, 14.241, 14.326, 14.850, 14.871, and 14.872.

List of Subjects

24 CER Part 5

       Administrative practice and procedure, Aged, Claims, Crime, Government contracts,

Grant programs-housing and community development, Individuals with disabilities,

Intergovernmental relations, Loan programs-housing and community development, Low and

moderate income housing, Mortgage insurance, Penalties, Pets, Public housing, Rent subsidies,

Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Social security, Unemployment compensation.

24 CEFR Part 880

       Grant programs-housing and community development, Rent subsidies, Reporting and

recordkeeping requirements.

24 CFR Part 884

       Grant programs-housing and community development, Rent subsidies, Reporting and

recordkeeping requirements, rural areas.

24 CER Part 886
                                                                                             61


        Grant programs-housing and community development, Lead poisoning, Rent subsidies,

Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.

24 CFR Part 891

        Aged, Grant programs-housing and community development, Individuals with

disabilities, Loan programs-housing and community development, Rent subsidies, Reporting and

recordkeeping requirements.

24 CEFR Part 903

        Administrative practice and procedure, Public housing, Reporting and recordkeeping

requirements

24 CEFR Part 960

        Aged, Grant programs-housing and community development, Individuals with

disabilities, Pets, Public housing.

24 CER Part 966

        Grant programs-housing and community development, Public housing, Reporting and

recordkeeping requirements.

24 CFR Part 982

        Grant programs-housing and community development, Grant programs-Indians, Indians,

Public housing, Rent subsidies, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.

24 CEFR Part 983

        Grant programs-housing and community development, Rent subsidies, Reporting and

recordkeeping requirements.

24 CER Part 990
                                                                                                  62


       Accounting, Grant programs-housing and community development, Public housing,

Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.

       Accordingly, for the reasons stated in the preamble, HUD proposes to revise 24 CFR

parts 5, 880, 884, 886, 891, 960, 966, 982, 983, and 990 as follows:

             PART 5—GENERAL          HUD PROGRAM         REQUIREMENTS;          WAIVERS

        1. The authority citation for part 5 continues to read as follows:

       Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1437a, 1437c, 1437d, 1437f, 1437n, 3535(d), Sec. 327, Pub. L.

109-115, 119 Stat. 2936, and Sec. 607, Pub. L. 109-162, 119 Stat. 3051.



       2. Amend § 5.216 as follows:

       a. Designate the second paragraph (g)(1)(i1) as paragraph (g)(1) G11);

       b. Revise paragraph (h)(1);

       c. In paragraph (h)(2), remove the phrase “paragraph (h)(1)” and add in its place

“paragraph (g)(1)”; and

       d. Add paragraph (h)(3).

       The revision and addition read as follows:

§ 5.216 Disclosure and verification of Social Security and Employer Identification

Numbers.

ok      ok      ok        ok   ok




       (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (h)(2) and (3) of this section, if the processing entity

determines that the assistance applicant is otherwise eligible to participate in a program, the

assistance applicant may retain its place on the waiting list for the program but cannot become a
                                                                                                   63


participant until it can provide the documentation referred to in paragraph (g)(1) of this section to

verify the SSN of each member of the household.

*k      *k     *k      *k      *k

       (3) If a child under the age of 6 years was added to the assistance applicant household

within the 6-month period prior to the household’s date of admission (or, for the HCV program,

the date of voucher issuance), the assistance applicant may become a participant, so long as the

documentation required in paragraph (g)(1) of this section is provided to the processing entity

within 90 calendar days from the date of admission into the program (or, for the HCV program,

the effective date of the Housing Assistance Payment contract). The processing entity must grant

an extension of one additional 90-day period if the processing entity determines that, in its

discretion, the assistance applicant’s failure to comply was due to circumstances that could not

reasonably have been foreseen and were outside the control of the assistance applicant. If the

applicant family fails to produce the documentation required in paragraph (g)(1) of this section

within the required time period, the processing entity must follow the provisions of § 5.218.

ok     ok      ok      ok      ok




       3. Amend § 5.520 as follows:

       a. Revise paragraph (c)(1) introductory text;

       b. In paragraph (c)(1)(v), remove the comma;

       c. Revise paragraph (c)(2) introductory text;

       d. In paragraphs (c)(2)(i) and (c)(2)(@i1), remove the comma;

       e. Revise paragraph (d); and

       f. Add paragraph (e).
                                                                                                   64

       The revisions and addition read as follows:


§ 5.520 Proration of assistance.

ok     ok      ok      ok      ok


       (c)     ok      ok      ok



       (1) Section 8 assistance other than assistance provided for a tenancy under the Section 8

Housing Choice Voucher Program. For Section 8 assistance other than assistance for a tenancy

under the voucher program, the PHA must prorate the family’s assistance as follows:

ok     ok      ok      ok      ok



       (2) Assistance for a Section 8 voucher tenancy. For a tenancy under the voucher program,

the PHA must prorate the family’s assistance as follows:

ok     ok      ok      ok      ok



       (d) Method of prorating assistance for Public Housing covered programs. (1) The PHA

must prorate the family’s assistance as follows:

       (i) Step1. Determine the total tenant payment in accordance with section 5.628. (Annual

income includes income of all family members, including any family member who has not

established eligible immigration status.)

       (ii) Step2. Subtract the total tenant payment from the PHA-established flat rent

applicable to the unit. The result is the maximum subsidy for which the family could qualify if

all members were eligible (“family maximum subsidy’).

       (ii) Step3. Divide the family maximum subsidy by the number of persons in the family

(all persons) to determine the maximum subsidy per each family member who has citizenship or

eligible immigration status (“eligible family member”). The subsidy per eligible family member

is the “member maximum subsidy.”
                                                                                                      65


       (iv) Step4. Multiply the member maximum subsidy by the number of family members

who have citizenship or eligible immigration status (“eligible family members”).

       (2) The product of steps | through 4 of paragraphs (d)(1)@) through (d)(1)(iv) of this

section is the amount of subsidy for which the family is eligible (“eligible subsidy”). The

family’s rent is the PHA-established flat rent minus the amount of the eligible subsidy.

       (e) Method of prorating assistance when the mixed family’s total tenant payment (TTP) is

greater than the public housing flat rent. When the mixed family’s TTP is greater than the flat

rent, the PHA must use the TTP as the mixed family TTP. The PHA subtracts from the mixed

family TTP any established utility allowance, and the sum becomes the mixed family rent.




       4. In § 5.603(b), revise the definitions of “Extremely low income family” and “Total

tenant payment” to read as follows:

§ 5.603 Definitions.

ok     ok      ok      ok      ok




       Extremely low-income family.       A very low-income family whose annual income does

not exceed the higher of:

       (1) the poverty guidelines established by the Department of Health and Human Services

applicable to the family of the size involved (except in the case of families living in Puerto Rico

or any other territory or possession of the United States); or

       (2) 30 percent of the median income for the area, as determined by HUD, with

adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that HUD may establish income ceilings
                                                                                                  66


higher or lower than 30 percent of the area median income for the area if HUD finds that such

variations are necessary because of unusually high or low family incomes.

ok      ok      ok       ok       ok



        Total tenant payment. See § 5.628.

ok      ok      ok       ok       ok




§ 5.609 [Amended]

        5. Amend § 5.609(b)(9) by adding the phrase “and any other required fees and charges”

after “tuition” in the first sentence.




        6. Amend § 5.617 as follows:

        a. Revise paragraph (a);

        b. In paragraph (b), add the definition of “baseline income” in alphabetical order; and

        c. Revise paragraph (c) to read as follows:

8 5.617 Self-sufficiency incentives for persons with disabilities—Disallowance of increase in

annual income.


        (a) Applicable programs. The disallowance of earned income provided by this section is

applicable only to the following programs: HOME Investment Partnerships Program (24 CFR

part 92); Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (24 CFR part 574); Supportive Housing

Program (24 CFR part 583); and the Housing Choice Voucher Program (24 CFR part 982).
                                                                                                     67


       Baseline income. The annual income immediately prior to implementation of the

disallowance described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section of a person with disabilities (who is a

member of a qualified family).

ok     ok      ok      ok        ok



       (c) Disallowance of increase in annual income. (1) Initial 12-month exclusion. During the

12- month period beginning on the date a member who is a person with disabilities of a qualified

family is first employed or the family first experiences an increase in annual income attributable

to employment, the responsible entity must exclude from annual income (as defined in the

regulations governing the applicable program listed in paragraph (a) of this section) of a

qualified family any increase in income of the family member who is a person with disabilities as

a result of employment over prior income of that family member.

       (2) Second 12-month exclusion and phase-in. Upon the expiration of the 12-month period

defined in paragraph (c)(1) of this section and for the subsequent 12-month period, the

responsible entity must exclude from annual income of a qualified family at least 50 percent of

any increase in income of such family member as a result of employment over the family

member’s baseline income.

       (3) Maximum 2-year disallowance. The disallowance of increased income of an

individual family member who is a person with disabilities as provided in paragraph (c)(1) or

(c)(2) of this section is limited to a lifetime 24-month period. The disallowance applies for a

maximum of 12 months for disallowance under paragraph (c)(1) of this section and a maximum

of 12 months for disallowance under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, during the 24- month

period starting from the initial exclusion under paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
                                                                                                     68


          (4) Effect of changes on currently participating families. Families eligible for and

participating in the disallowance of earned income under this section prior to INSERT DATE

60 DAYS AFTER DATE OF PUBLICATION IN THE FEDERAL                             REGISTER] will

continue to be governed by this section in effect as it existed immediately prior to that date.

ok        ok      ok      ok      ok




          7. In § 5.657, add paragraph (d) to read as follows:

§ 5.657 Section 8 project-based assistance programs: Reexamination of family income and

composition.

ok        ok      ok      ok      ok



          (d) Streamlined income determination. For any family member with a fixed source of

income, an owner may elect to determine that family member’s income, as required by paragraph

(b) of this section, by means of a streamlined income determination.      A streamlined income

determination must be conducted by applying, for each fixed-income source, the verified cost of

living adjustment (COLA) or current rate of interest to the previously verified or adjusted income

amount.

          (1) “Family member with a fixed source of income” is defined as a family member whose

income includes periodic payments at reasonably predictable levels from one or more of the

following sources:

          (i) Social Security, Supplemental Security Income, Supplemental Disability Insurance;

          (11) Federal, state, local, or private pension plans;

          (iii) Annuities or other retirement benefit programs, insurance policies, disability or death

benefits, or other similar types of periodic receipts; or
                                                                                                    69


         (iv) Any other source of income subject to adjustment by a verifiable COLA or current

rate of interest.

         (2) An owner must use a COLA or current rate of interest specific to the fixed source of

income in order to adjust the income amount. The owner must verify the appropriate COLA or

current rate of interest from a public source or through tenant-provided, third party—generated

documentation. If no such verification is available, then the owner must obtain third-party

verification of income amounts in order to calculate the change in income for the source.

         (3) For any family member whose income is determined pursuant to a streamlined

income determination, an owner must obtain third-party verification of all fixed-income amounts

every 3 years. Other income for each family member must be determined pursuant to paragraph

(b) of this section.




 PART 880—SECTION 8 HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS                             PROGRAM    FOR NEW

                                         CONSTRUCTION

         8. The authority citation for part 880 continues to read as follows:

         Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1437a, 1437c, 1437f, 3535(d), 12701, and 13611-13619.




         9. In § 880.603, add paragraph (c)(4) to read as follows:

§ 880.603 Selection and admission of assisted tenants.

ok       ok         ok   ok     ok


         (c)        ok   ok     ok



         (4) Streamlined income determination. An owner may elect to follow the provisions of 24

CFR 5.657(d).
                                                                                               70




     PART 884—SECTION 8 HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS                             PROGRAM, NEW

     CONSTRUCTION SET-ASIDE FOR SECTION 515 RURAL RENTAL HOUSING

                                            PROJECTS

        10. The authority citation for part 884 continues to read as follows:

       Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1437a, 1437c, 1437f, 3535(d), and 13611-13619.




        11. In § 884.218, add paragraph (d) to read as follows:

S 884.218 Reexamination of family income and composition.

ok     ok       ok     ok      ok



       (d) Streamlined income determination. An owner may elect to follow the provisions of 24

CFR 5.657(d).


PART 886—SECTION 8 HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS                            PROGRAM—SPECIAL

                                         ALLOCATIONS

        12. The authority citation for part 886 continues to read as follows:

       Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1437a, 1437c, 1437f, 3535(d), and 13611-13619.




        13. In § 886.124, add paragraph (d) to read as follows:

S$ 886.124 Reexamination of family income and composition.

ok     ok       ok     ok      ok



       (d) Streamlined income determination. An owner may elect to follow the provisions of 24

CFR 5.657(d).
                                                                                             71




        14. In § 886.324, add paragraph (d) to read as follows:

S 886.324 Reexamination of family income and composition.

ok      ok      ok     ok      ok



        (d) Streamlined income determination. An owner may elect to follow the provisions of 24

CFR 5.657(d).


     PART 891—SUPPORTIVE HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY AND PERSONS WITH

                                          DISABILITIES

        15. The authority citation for part 891 continues to read as follows:

        Authority: 12 U.S.C. 1701q; 42 U.S.C. 1437f, 3535(d), and 8013.




        16. In § 891.410, add paragraph (4) to read as follows:

§ 891.410 Selection and admission of tenants.

ok      ok      ok     ok      ok



        (2)     *      *
        (4) Streamlined income determination. An owner may elect to follow the provisions of 24

CFR 5.657(d).


        17. In § 891.610), add paragraph (g)(4) to read as follows:

§ 891.610 Selection and admission of tenants.

ok      ok      ok     ok      ok
                                                                                               72


       (4) Streamlined income determination. An owner may elect to follow the provisions of 24

CFR 5.657(d).




       18. In § 891.750, add paragraph (c)(4) to read as follows:

§ 891.750 Selection and admission of tenants.

ok     ok       ok    ok      ok


       (c)      ok    ok      ok



       (4) Streamlined income determination. An owner may elect to follow the provisions of 24

CFR 5.657(d).




                     PART 903—PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY PLANS

       19. The authority citation for part 903 continues to read as follows:

       Authority: 2 U.S.C. 1437c; 42 U.S.C. 1437c-1; Pub. L. 110-289; 42 U.S.C. 3535d.




       20. In § 903.7, revise paragraph (a)(1)() to read as follows:

§ 903.7 What information must a PHA provide in the Annual Plan?




       (i) Families meeting the definition of extremely low-income families in 24 CFR 5.603.

ok     ok       ok    ok      ok




       PART 960—ADMISSION TO, AND OCCUPANCY                         OF, PUBLIC HOUSING
                                                                                                     73


         21. The authority citation for part 960 continues to read as follows:

         Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1437a, 1437c, 1437d, 1437n, 1437z-3, and 3535(d).




         22. In § 960.102, revise paragraph (a) to read as follows:

§ 960.102 Definitions.

         (a) Definitions found elsewhere:

         (1) General definitions. The following terms are defined in 24 CFR part 5, subpart A:

1937 Act, drug, drug-related criminal activity, elderly person, federally assisted housing, guest,

household, HUD, MSA, premises, public housing, public housing agency (PHA), Section 8,

violent criminal activity.

         (2) Definitions under the 1937 Act. The following terms are defined in 24 CFR part 5,

subpart D: annual contributions contract (ACC), applicant, elderly family, family, person with

disabilities.

         (3) Definitions and explanations concerning income and rent. The following terms are

defined or explained in 24 CFR part 5, subpart F(§ 5.603): Annual income, economic self-

sufficiency program, extremely low-income family, low-income family, tenant rent, total tenant

payment, utility allowance.

ok       ok     ok       ok     ok




         23. Amend § 960.253 as follows:

         a. Revise paragraph (b);

         b. In paragraph (c)(1), remove the phrase “PHA’s rent policies” and add in its place

“PHA’s policies”;
                                                                                                      74


        c. Remove the last sentence of paragraph (c)(3) and add paragraph (c)(4);

        d. Revise paragraphs (d) and (e)(2);

        e. Redesignate paragraph (f) as paragraph (g); and

        f. Add a new paragraph (f).

        The revisions and addition read as follows:

§ 960.253 Choice of rent.

ok      ok     ok      ok      ok



        (b) Flat rent. The flat rent is determined annually, based on the market rental value of the

unit as determined by this paragraph (b).

        (1) The PHA must establish a flat rent for each public housing unit that is no less than 80

percent of the applicable Fair Market Rent (FMR) as determined under 24 CFR part 888, subpart

A; or

        (2) HUD may permit a flat rent of no less than 80 percent of an applicable small area

FMR (SAFMR) or unadjusted rent, if applicable, as determined by HUD, or any successor

determination, that more accurately reflects local market conditions and is based on an applicable

market area that is geographically smaller than the applicable market area used in paragraph

(b)(1) of this section. If HUD has not determined an applicable SAFMR       or unadjusted rent, the

PHA must rely on the applicable FMR under paragraph (b)(1) or may apply for an exception flat

rent under paragraph (b)(3).

        (3) The PHA may request, and HUD may approve, on a case-by-case basis, a flat rent

that is lower than the amounts in paragraphs (b)(1) and (2) of this section, subject to the

following requirements:

        (i) The PHA must submit a market analysis of the applicable market.
                                                                                                    75


        (ii) The PHA must demonstrate, based on the market analysis, that the proposed flat rent

is a reasonable rent in comparison to rent for other comparable unassisted units, based on the

location, quality, size, unit type, and age of the public housing unit and any amenities, housing

services, maintenance, and utilities to be provided by the PHA in accordance with the lease.

        (iii) All requests for exception flat rents under this paragraph (b)(3) must be submitted to

HUD.

        (4) For units where utilities are tenant-paid, the PHA must adjust the flat rent downward

by the amount of a utility allowance for which the family might otherwise be eligible under 24

CFR part 965, subpart E.

        (5) The PHA must revise, if necessary, the flat rent amount for a unit no later than 90

days after HUD issues new FMRs.

        (6) If a new flat rent would cause a family's rent to increase by more than 35 percent, the

family's rent increase must be phased in at 35 percent annually until such time that the family

chooses to pay the income-based rent or the family is paying the flat rent established pursuant to

this paragraph.

        (c)




        (4) The PHA may elect to establish policies regarding the frequency of utility

reimbursement payments for payments made to the family.

        (i) The PHA will have the option of making utility reimbursement payments not less than

once per calendar-year quarter, for reimbursements totaling $45 or less per quarter. In the event a

family leaves the program in advance of its next quarterly reimbursement, the PHA must

reimburse the family for a prorated share of the applicable reimbursement. PHAs exercising this

option must have a hardship policy in place for tenants.
                                                                                                      76


        (ii) If the PHA elects to pay the utility supplier, the PHA must notify the family of the

amount of utility rermbursement paid to the utility supplier.

        (d) Ceiling rent.        A PHA using ceiling rents authorized and established before October 1,

1999, may continue to use ceiling rents, provided such ceiling rents are set at the level required

for flat rents under this section. PHAs must follow the requirements for calculating and adjusting

flat rents in paragraph (b) of this section when calculating and adjusting ceiling rents.

        (e)     *k          *k       *k

        (2) The dollar amounts of tenant rent for the family under each option, following the

procedures in paragraph (f) of this section.

        (f) Choice between flat and income-based rents. Families must be offered the choice

between a flat rental amount and a previously calculated income-based rent according to the

following:

        (1) For a family that chooses the flat rent option, the PHA must conduct a reexamination

of family income and composition at least once every three years.

        (2) At initial occupancy, or in any year in which a participating family is paying the

income-based rent, the PHA must:

        (i) Conduct a full examination of family income and composition, following the

provisions in § 960.257;

        (ii) Inform the family of the flat rental amount and the income-based rental amount

determined by the examination of family income and composition;

        (111) Inform the family of the PHA’s policies on switching rent types in circumstances of

financial hardship; and

        (iv) Apply the family’s rent decision at the next lease renewal.
                                                                                                  77


        (3) In any year in which a family chooses the flat rent option but the PHA chooses not to

conduct a full examination of family income and composition for the annual rent option under

the authority of paragraph (f)(1) of this section, the PHA must:

        (1) Use income information from the examination of family income and composition from

the first annual rent option;

        (ii) Inform the family of the updated flat rental amount and the rental amount determined

by the most recent examination of family income and composition;

        (111) Inform the family of the PHA’s policies on switching rent types in circumstances of

financial hardship; and

        (iv) Apply the family’s rent decision at the next lease renewal.

ok      ok      ok        ok    ok




        24. Amend § 960.255 as follows:

        a. In paragraph (a), add the definition of “baseline income” in alphabetical order; and

        b. Revise paragraph (b) to read as follows:

S$ 960.255 Self-sufficiency incentives—Disallowance of increase in annual income.

        (a)     ok        ok    ok



        Baseline income. The annual income immediately prior to implementation of the

disallowance described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section of a person who is a member of a

qualified family.

        ok      ok        ok    ok     ok



        (b) Disallowance of earned income.—(1) Initial 12-month exclusion. During the 12-

month period beginning on the date on which a member of a qualified family is first employed or
                                                                                                   78


the family first experiences an increase in annual income attributable to employment, the PHA

must exclude from the annual income (as defined in § 5.609 of this title) of a qualified family

any increase in the income of the family member as a result of employment over the baseline

income of that family member.

           (2) Phase-in of rent increase. Upon the expiration of the 12-month period defined in

paragraph (b)(1) of this section and for the subsequent 12-month period, the PHA must exclude

from the annual income of a qualified family at least 50 percent of any increase in income of

such family member as a result of employment over the family member’s baseline income.

           (3) Maximum 2-year disallowance. The disallowance of increased income of an

individual family member as provided in paragraph (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section is limited to a

lifetime 24-month period. It applies for a maximum of 12 months for disallowance under

paragraph (b)(1) of this section and a maximum of 12 months for disallowance under paragraph

(b)(2) of this section, during the 24-month period starting from the initial exclusion under

paragraph (b)(1) of this section.

           (4) Effect of changes on currently participating families. Families eligible for and

participating in the disallowance of earned income under this section prior to [INSERT DATE

60 DAYS AFTER DATE OF PUBLICATION IN THE FEDERAL REGISTER] will

continue to be governed by this section in effect as it existed immediately prior to that date.

ok         ok     ok      ok      ok




           25. In § 960.257, revise the section heading and paragraphs (a)(2) and (b) to read as

follows:

§ 960.257 Family income and composition: Annual and interim reexaminations.
                                                                                                    79

          (a)




          (2) For families who choose flat rents, the PHA must conduct a reexamination of family

composition at least annually, and must conduct a reexamination of family income at least once

every three years in accordance with the procedures in § 960.253(f).

ok        ok        ok     ok      ok



          (b) Interim reexaminations. (1) A family may request an interim reexamination of family

income or composition because of any changes since the last determination.

          (2) The PHA must make the interim reexamination within a reasonable time after the

family request. The PHA must adopt policies prescribing when and under what conditions the

family must report a change in family income or composition.

          (3) Streamlined income determination. For any family member with a fixed source of

income,        a PHA may elect to determine that family member’s income by means of a streamlined

income determination. A streamlined income determination must be conducted by applying, for

each fixed-income source, the verified cost of living adjustment (COLA) or current rate of

interest to the previously verified or adjusted income amount.

          (1) “Family member with a fixed source of income” is defined as a family member whose

income includes periodic payments at reasonably predictable levels from one or more of the

following sources:

          (A) Social Security, Supplemental Security Income, Supplemental Disability Insurance;

          (B) Federal, state, local, or private pension plans;

          (C) Annuities or other retirement benefit programs, insurance policies, disability or death

benefits, or other similar types of periodic receipts; or
                                                                                                          80


         (D) Any other source of income subject to adjustment by a verifiable COLA or current

rate of interest.

         (ii)   A PHA must use a COLA       or current rate of interest specific to the fixed source of

income in order to adjust the income amount. The PHA must verify the appropriate COLA or

current rate of interest from a public source or through tenant-provided, third party—generated

documentation. If no such verification is available, then the PHA must obtain third-party

verification of income amounts in order to calculate the change in income for the source.

         (iii) For any family member whose income is determined pursuant to a streamlined

income determination,         a PHA must obtain third-party verification of all income amounts every 3

years.

ok       ok         ok   ok         ok




         26. In § 960.259, revise paragraph (c)(1) introductory text, and add paragraph (c)(2) to

read as follows:

§ 960.259 Family information and verification.

ok       ok         ok   ok         ok


         (c)        *    *          *




         (1) Except as provided in paragraph (c)(2), the PHA must obtain and document in the

family file third-party verification of the following factors, or must document in the file why

third-party verification was not available:

ok       ok         ok   ok         ok
                                                                                                    81


        (2) For a family with net assets equal to or less than $5,000,   a PHA may accept, for

purposes of recertification of income, a family’s declaration that it has net assets equal to or less

than $5,000, without taking additional steps to verify the accuracy of the declaration.

        (1) The declaration must state the amount of income the family expects to receive from

such assets; this amount must be included in the family’s income.

        (i)   A PHA must obtain third-party verification of all family assets every 3 years.




       27. In § 960.605, revise paragraphs (c)(2) through (c)(5) to read as follows:

§ 960.605 How PHA administers service requirements.

ok     ok       ok      ok      ok


        (c)     xk      xk      xk

        (2) The PHA must give the family a written description of the service requirement, and of

the process for claiming status as an exempt person and for PHA verification of such status. The

PHA must also notify the family of its determination identifying the family members who are

subject to the service requirement, and the family members who are exempt persons. The PHA

must also notify the family that it will be validating a sample of self-certifications of completion

of the service requirement accepted by the PHA under § 960.607(a)(1)(ii).

        (3) The PHA must review family compliance with service requirements and must verify

such compliance annually at least 30 days before the end of the 12-month lease term. If

qualifying activities are administered by an organization other than the PHA, the PHA may

obtain verification of family compliance from such third parties or may accept a signed

certification from the family member that he or she has performed such qualifying activities.
                                                                                                       82


        (4) The PHA must retain reasonable documentation of service requirement performance

or exemption in a participant family’s files.

        (5) The PHA must comply with non-discrimination and equal opportunity requirements

listed at § 5.105(a) of this title and affirmatively further fair housing in all their activities in

accordance with the AFFH Certification as described in § 903.7(0).




        28. In § 960.607, revise paragraph (a) to read as follows:

S 960.607 Assuring resident compliance.

        (a) Acceptable documentation demonstrating compliance. (1) If qualifying activities are

administered by an organization other than the PHA, a family member who is required to fulfill a

service requirement must provide one of the following:

        (i) A signed certification to the PHA by such other organization that the family member

has performed such qualifying activities; or

        (ii) A signed self-certification to the PHA by the family member that he or she has

performed such qualifying activities.

        (2) The signed self-certification must include the following:

        (1) A statement that the tenant contributed at least 8 hours per month of community

service not including political activities within the community in which the adult resides; or

participated in an economic self-sufficiency program (as that term is defined in 24 CFR

5.603(b)) for at least 8 hours per month;

        (ii) The name, address, and a contact person at the community service provider; or the

name, address, and contact person for the economic self-sufficiency program;
                                                                                                      83


           (iii) The date(s) during which the tenant completed the community service activity, or

participated in the economic self-sufficiency program;

           (iv) A description of the activity completed; and

           (v) A certification that the tenant’s statement is true.

           (3) If a PHA accepts self-certifications under paragraph (a)(1)(i1) of this section, the PHA

must validate a sample of such self-certifications using third-party certification described in

paragraph (a)(1)@) of this section.

ok         ok      ok      ok      ok




           PART 966—PUBLIC HOUSING LEASE AND GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

           29. The authority citation for part 966 continues to read as follows:

           Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1437d and 3535(d).




           30. Revise § 966.4(n) to read as follows:

§ 966.4 Lease Requirements.

ok         ok      ok      ok      ok



           (n) Grievance procedures. (1) The lease must provide that all disputes concerning the

obligations of the tenant or the PHA must (except as provided in § 966.51(a)(2)) be resolved in

accordance with the PHA grievance procedures. The grievance procedures must comply with

subpart B of this part.

           (2) The lease must include a description of the PHA’s policies for selecting a hearing

officer.

ok         ok      ok      ok      ok
                                                                                                      84



        31. Amend § 966.52 by adding a sentence at the end of paragraph (a) and adding

paragraph (e), to read as follows:

§ 966.52 Requirements.

        (a)     **      **      * A PHA may establish an expedited grievance procedure as

defined in § 966.53.

*k      *k      *k      *k      *k

        (e) The PHA must not only meet the minimal procedural due process requirements

contained in this subpart but also satisfy any additional requirements required by local, state, or

federal law.




        32. In § 966.53, revise paragraphs (b), (d), and (e) to read as follows:

§ 966.53 Definitions.

ok      ok      ok      ok      ok



        (b) Complainant shall mean any tenant whose grievance is presented to the PHA or at the

project management office.

ok      ok      ok      ok      ok



        (d) Expedited grievance means a procedure established by the PHA for any grievance

concerning a termination of tenancy or eviction that involves:

        (1) Any criminal activity that threatens the health, safety, or right to peaceful enjoyment

of the PHA’s public housing premises by other residents or employees of the PHA; or

        (2) Any drug-related or violent criminal activity on or off such premises.
                                                                                                   85


        (e) Hearing officer means an impartial person or persons selected by the PHA, other than

the person who made or approved the decision under review, or a subordinate of that person.

Such individual or individuals do not need legal training. PHAs must describe their policies for

selection of a hearing officer in their lease forms as required by § 966.4, changes to which are

subject to a 30-day comment period as described in § 966.3.

ok      ok      ok     ok       ok




§ 966.54 [Amended]

        33. Amend § 966.54 by removing the phrase “under § 966.55”.




§ 966.55 [Removed |]

        34. Remove § 966.55.




        35. Amend § 966.56 as follows:

        a. Revise paragraph (a);

        b. In paragraph (b)(2), remove the comma;

        c. Remove paragraphs (c) and (f);

        d. Redesignate paragraphs (d), (e), (g), and (h) as paragraphs (c), (d), (e) and (f),

respectively;

        e. Revise redesignated paragraph (c); and

        f. Add paragraph (g).

        The revisions and addition read as follows:

S 966.56 Procedures governing the hearing.
                                                                                                  86


       (a) The hearing must be scheduled promptly for a time and place reasonably convenient

to both the complainant and the PHA and held before a hearing officer. A written notification

specifying the time, place, and the procedures governing the hearing must be delivered to the

complainant and the appropriate official.

*k     *k      *k      *k      *k

       (c) If the complainant or the PHA fails to appear at a scheduled hearing, the hearing

officer may make a determination to postpone the hearing for no more than 5 business days or

may make a determination that the party has waived his right to a hearing. Both the complainant

and the PHA must be notified of the determination by the hearing officer A determination that

the complainant has waived the complainant’s right to a hearing will not constitute a waiver of

any right the complainant may have to contest the PHA’s disposition of the grievance in an

appropriate judicial proceeding.

ok     ok      ok      ok      ok



       (g¢) Limited English Proficiency. PHAs must comply with HUD’s Final Guidance on LEP

published in the Federal Register on January 22, 2007.




       36. Revise § 966.57 to read as follows:

§ 966.57 Decision of the hearing officer.

       (a) The hearing officer must prepare a written decision, including the reasons for the

PHA’s decision within a reasonable time after the hearing. A copy of the decision must be sent to

the complainant and the PHA. The PHA must retain a copy of the decision in the tenant’s folder.

The PHA must maintain a log of all hearing officer decisions and make that log available upon
                                                                                                      87


request of the hearing officer, a prospective complainant, or a prospective complainant’s

representative.

          (b) The decision of the hearing officer will be binding on the PHA unless the PHA Board

of Commissioners determines that:

          (1) The grievance does not concern PHA action or failure to act in accordance with or

involving the complainant’s lease on PHA regulations, which adversely affects the complainant’s

rights, duties, welfare or status; or

          (2) The decision of the hearing officer is contrary to applicable Federal, State or local

law, HUD regulations or requirements of the annual contributions contract between HUD and the

PHA.

          (c) A decision by the hearing officer or Board of Commissioners in favor of the PHA or

which denies the relief requested by the complainant in whole or in part will not constitute a

waiver of, nor affect in any manner whatever, any rights the complainant may have to a trial de

novo or judicial review in any judicial proceedings, which may thereafter be brought in the

matter.




       PART 982—SECTION 8 TENANT-BASED ASSISTANCE: HOUSING CHOICE

                                        VOUCHER PROGRAM

          37. The authority citation for part 982 continues to read as follows:

          Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1437f and 3535(d).




          38. In § 982.402 add a sentence at the end of (d)(2) to read as follows:

§ 982.402 Subsidy Standards.
                                                                                                     88




       (2)     **      **      * However, utility allowances must follow § 982.517(d).




       39. Amend § 982.405 as follows:

       a. In paragraph (a), remove the word “annually” and add in its place “biennially”;

       b. Revise paragraph (e); and

       c. Add paragraphs (f) and (g).

       The revision and addition read as follows:

§ 982.405 PHA initial and periodic unit inspection.

ok     ok      ok      ok      ok



       (f) The PHA may not charge the owner for the inspection of the unit prior to the initial

term of the lease or for a first inspection during assisted occupancy of the unit. The PHA may

establish a reasonable fee to owners for a reinspection if an owner notifies the PHA that a repair

has been made or the allotted time for repairs has elapsed and a reinspection reveals that any

deficiency cited in the previous inspection that the owner is responsible for repairing pursuant to

§ 982.404(a) was not corrected. The owner may not pass this fee along to the family. Fees

collected under this paragraph will be included in a PHA’s administrative fee reserve and may be

used only for activities related to the provision of Section 8 Tenant-Based Rental Assistance.

       (g) If a participant family or government official reports a condition that is life-

threatening (1.e., the PHA would require the owner to make the repair within no more than 24

hours in accordance with § 982.404(a)(3)), then the PHA must inspect the housing unit within 24

hours of when the PHA received the notification. If the reported condition is not life-threatening
                                                                                                   89


(i.e., the PHA would require the owner to make the repair within no more than 30 calendar days

in accordance with § 982.404(a)(3)), then the PHA must inspect the unit within 15 days of when

the PHA received the notification. In the event of extraordinary circumstances, such as if a unit is

within a Presidentially declared disaster area, HUD may waive the 24-hour or the 15-day

inspection requirement until such time as an inspection is feasible.




§ 982.406 [Redesignated as § 982.407]

       AQ. Redesignate § 982.406 as § 982.407.




       41. Add a new § 982.406 to read as follows:

S$ 982.406 Use of Alternative Inspections.

       (a) In general. (1)   A PHA may comply with the inspection requirement in § 982.405(a)

by relying on an alternative inspection (1.e., an inspection conducted for another housing

assistance program) only if the PHA is able to obtain the results of the alternative inspection.

       (2) If an alternative inspection method employs sampling, then a PHA may rely on such

alternative inspection method to comply with the requirement in § 982.405(a) only if HCV units

are included in the population of units forming the basis of the sample.

       (3) Units in properties that are mixed-finance properties assisted with project-based

vouchers may be inspected at least triennially pursuant to 24 CFR 983.103(g).

       (b) Administrative plans.    A PHA relying on an alternative inspection to fulfill the

requirement in § 982.405(a) must identify the alternative inspection method being used in the

PHA’s administrative plan. Such a change may be a significant amendment to the plan, in which

case the PHA must follow its plan amendment and public notice requirements, in addition to
                                                                                                     90


meeting the requirements in § 982.406(c)(2), if applicable, before using the alternative inspection

method.

          (c) Eligible inspection methods. (1)   A PHA may rely upon inspections of housing

assisted under the HOME Investment Partnerships (HOME) program or housing financed using

Low-Income Housing Tax Credits (LIHTCs), or inspections performed by HUD, with no action

other than amending its administrative plan.

          (2) If a PHA wishes to rely on an inspection method other than a method listed in

paragraph (c)(1) of this section, then, prior to amending its administrative plan, the PHA must

submit to the Real Estate Assessment Center (REAC) a copy of the inspection method it wishes

to use, along with its analysis of the inspection method that shows that the method “provides the

same or greater protection to occupants of dwelling units” as would HQS.

          (i)    A PHA may rely upon such alternative inspection method only upon receiving

approval from REAC to do so.

          (ii)   A PHA that uses an alternative inspection method approved under this paragraph

must monitor changes to the standards and requirements applicable to such method. If any

change is made to the alternative inspection method, then the PHA must submit to REAC a copy

of the revised standards and requirements, along with a revised comparison to HQS. If the PHA

or REAC determines that the revision would cause the alternative inspection to no longer meet or

exceed HQS, then the PHA may no longer rely upon the alternative inspection method to comply

with the inspection requirement at § 982.405(a).

          (d) Results of alternative inspection. (1) In order for a PHA to rely upon the results of an

alternative inspection to comply with the requirement at § 982.405(a), a property inspected

pursuant to such method must meet the standards or requirements regarding housing quality or
                                                                                                  91


safety applicable to properties assisted under the program using the alternative inspection

method. To make the determination of whether such standards or requirements are met, the PHA

must adhere to the following procedures:

       (1) If a property is inspected under an alternative inspection method, and the property

receives a “pass” score, then the PHA may rely on that inspection to demonstrate compliance

with the inspection requirement at § 982.405(a).

       (ii) If a property is inspected under an alternative inspection method, and the property

receives a “fail” score, then the PHA may not rely on that inspection to demonstrate compliance

with the inspection requirement at § 982.405(a).

       (ii) If a property is inspected under an alternative inspection method that does not

employ a pass/fail determination—for example, in the case of a program where deficiencies are

simply identified —then the PHA must review the list of deficiencies to determine whether any

cited deficiency would have resulted in a “fail” score under HQS. If no such deficiency exists,

then the PHA may rely on the inspection to demonstrate compliance with the inspection

requirement at § 982.405(a); if such a deficiency does exist, then the PHA may not rely on the

inspection to demonstrate such compliance.

       (2) Under any circumstance described above in which a PHA 1s prohibited from relying

on an alternative inspection method for a property, the PHA must, within a reasonable period of

time, conduct an HQS inspection of any units in the property occupied by voucher program

participants and follow HQS procedures to remedy any identified deficiencies.

       (e) Records retention. As with all other inspection reports, and as required by §

982.158 (f)(4), reports for inspections conducted pursuant to an alternative inspection method
                                                                                                 92


must be obtained by the PHA. Such reports must be available for HUD inspection for at least

three years from the date of the latest inspection.




        42. Amend § 982.503 as follows:

        a. Add paragraph (b)(1)(i1);

        b. Remove the first word in paragraph (b)(2) and in its place add “Except as described in

§ 982.503(b)(1)(ai), the”; and

        c. Revise paragraph (c)(2):

        The revisions and addition read as follows:

§ 982.503 Payment standard amount and schedule.

*k      *k      *k      *k       *k

        (b)     *k      *k       *k

        (iii) The PHA may establish an exception payment standard of not more than 120 percent

of the published FMR if required as a reasonable accommodation in accordance with 24 CFR

part 8 for a family that includes a person with a disability. Any unit approved under an exception

payment standard must still meet the reasonable rent requirements found at § 982.507.

*k      *k      *k      *k       *k

        (c)     *k      *k       *k

        (2) Above 110 percent of FMR to 120 percent of published FMR.       The HUD Field Office

may approve an exception payment standard amount from above 110 percent of the published

FMR to not more than 120 percent of the published FMR (upper range) if the HUD Field Office

determines that approval is justified by either the median rent method or the 40th or 50th

percentile rent method as described in paragraph (c)(2)(i1) of this section (and that such approval
                                                                                                   93


is also supported by an appropriate program justification in accordance with paragraph (c)(4) of

this section).

         (1) Median rent method. In the median rent method, HUD determines the exception

payment standard amount by multiplying the FMR times a fraction of which the numerator is the

median gross rent of the exception area and the denominator is the median gross rent of the

entire FMR area. In this method, HUD uses median gross rent data from the most recent

decennial United States census, and the exception area may be any geographic entity within the

FMR area (or any combination of such entities) for which median gross rent data is provided in

decennial census products.

         (ii) 40th or 50th percentile rent method. In this method, HUD determines that the area

exception payment standard amount equals either the 40th or 50th percentile of rents for standard

quality rental housing in the exception area. HUD determines whether the 40th or 50th percentile

rent applies in accordance with the methodology described in § 888.113 of this title for

determining FMRs.       A PHA must present statistically representative rental housing survey data to

justify HUD approval.

ok      ok       ok      ok      ok




§ 982.505 [Amended]

        43. Revise § 982.505(d) to read as follows:

§ 982.505 How to calculate housing assistance payment.

ok      ok       ok      ok      ok



         (d) PHA approval of higher payment standard for the family as a reasonable

accommodation. If the family includes a person with disabilities and requires a payment standard
                                                                                                        94


above the basic range, as a reasonable accommodation for such person, in accordance with part 8

of this title, the PHA may establish a payment standard for the family of not more than 120

percent of the FMR.




          44. In § 982.514, add paragraph (c) to read as follows:

§ 982.514 Distribution of housing assistance payment.

ok        ok     ok      ok      ok



          (c) The PHA may elect to establish policies regarding the frequency of utility

reimbursement payments for payments made to the family.

          (1) The PHA will have the option of making utility rermbursement payments not less than

once per calendar-year quarter, for reimbursements totaling $45 or less per quarter. In the event a

family leaves the program in advance of its next quarterly reimbursement, the PHA would be

required to reimburse the family for a prorated share of the applicable reimbursement. PHAs

exercising this option must have a hardship policy in place for tenants.

          (ii) If the PHA elects to pay the utility supplier directly, the PHA must notify the family

of the amount paid to the utility supplier.




          45. Amend § 982.516 as follows:

          a. Revise the section heading;

          b. In paragraph (a), revise the introductory matter to paragraph (a)(2) and add paragraph

(a)(3);
          c. Remove paragraph (e);

          d. Redesignate paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) as paragraphs (c), (d), and (e), respectively;
                                                                                                      95


          e. Add a new paragraph (b);

          r. In redesignated paragraph (c), revise the paragraph heading; and

          g. Revise redesignated paragraph (e)(2).

          The revisions and addition read as follows:

§ 982.516 Family income and composition: Annual and interim examinations.

          (a)      *      *       *




          (2) Except as provided in paragraph (3), the PHA must obtain and document in the tenant

file third-party verification of the following factors, or must document in the tenant file why

third-party verification was not available:

          *        *      *




          (3) For a family with net assets equal to or less than $5,000,   a PHA may accept a family’s

declaration that it has net assets equal to or less than $5,000, without taking additional steps to

verify the accuracy of the declaration.

          (1) The declaration must state the amount of income the family expects to receive from

such assets; this amount must be included in the family’s income.

          (i)   A PHA must obtain third-party verification of all family assets every 3 years.

          (b) Streamlined income determination. For any family member with a fixed source of

income,       a PHA may elect to determine that family member’s income by means of a streamlined

income determination. A streamlined income determination must be conducted by applying, for

each fixed-income source, the verified cost of living adjustment (COLA) or current rate of

interest to the previously verified or adjusted income amount.
                                                                                                      96


         (1) “Family member with a fixed source of income” is defined as a family member whose

income includes periodic payments at reasonably predictable levels from one or more of the

following sources:

         (i) Social Security, Supplemental Security Income, Supplemental Disability Insurance;

         (11) Federal, state, local, or private pension plans;

         (iii) Annuities or other retirement benefit programs, insurance policies, disability or death

benefits, or other similar types of periodic receipts; or

         (iv) Any other source of income subject to adjustment by a verifiable COLA or current

rate of interest.

         (2)    A PHA must use a COLA or current rate of interest specific to the fixed source of

income in order to adjust the income amount. The PHA must verify the appropriate COLA or

current rate of interest from a public source or through tenant-provided, third party—generated

documentation. If no such verification is available, then the PHA must obtain third-party

verification of income amounts in order to calculate the change in income for the source.

         (3) For any family member whose income is determined pursuant to a streamlined

income determination,          a PHA must obtain third-party verification of all income amounts every 3

years.

         (c) Interim reexaminations.*               rk     ok

         ok         ae    k          we
*K



         (ce)       *     **         *k

         (2) At the effective date of a regular or interim reexamination, the PHA must make

appropriate adjustments in the housing assistance payment in accordance with § 982.505.

ok       ok         ok    ok         ok
                                                                                                    97




        46. Amend § 982.517 as follows:

        a. Capitalize the first word in paragraph (b)(2)(1); and

        b. Revise paragraph (d), to read as follows:

§ 982.517 Utility allowance schedule.

ok      ok      ok      ok      ok



        (d) Use of utility allowance schedule. The PHA must use the appropriate utility

allowance for the lesser of the size of dwelling unit actually leased by the family or the family

unit size as determined under the PHA subsidy standards. In cases where the unit size leased

exceeds the family unit size as determined under the PHA subsidy standards as a result of a

reasonable accommodation, the PHA must use the appropriate utility allowance for the size of

the dwelling unit actually leased by the family.

ok      ok      ok      ok      ok




               PART 983—PROJECT-BASED VOUCHER                      (PBV) PROGRAM

        47. The Authority citation for part 983 continues to read as follows:

        Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1437f and 3535(d).




§ 983.2 [Amended]

        48. In § 983.2 amend paragraph (c)(4) by removing the citation “§ 982.406” and adding

in its place “§ 982.407”.




        49, Amend § 983.103 as follows:
                                                                                                     98


       a. In the introductory matter of paragraph (a), add a period after “Pre-selection

inspection”; and

       b. Revise paragraph (d) and add paragraph (g) to read as follows:

§ 983.103 Inspecting Units.

ok     ok      ok      ok      ok



       (d) Biennial inspections. (1) At least biennially during the term of the HAP contract, the

PHA must inspect a random sample, consisting of at least 20 percent of the contract units in each

building, to determine if the contract units and the premises are maintained in accordance with

the HQS. Turnover inspections pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section are not counted toward

meeting this inspection requirement.

       (2) If more than 20 percent of the sample of inspected contract units in a building fail the

initial inspection, then the PHA must reinspect 100 percent of the contract units in the building.

       (3)   A PHA may also use the procedures applicable to HCV units in 24 CFR 982.406.

ok     ok      ok      ok      ok



       (g) Mixed-finance properties. In the case of a property assisted with project-based

vouchers (authorized at 42 U.S.C. 1437f(0)(13)) that is subject to an alternative inspection, the

PHA may rely upon inspections conducted at least triennially to demonstrate compliance with

the inspection requirement of 24 CFR 982.405(a).




            PART 990—THE PUBLIC HOUSING OPERATING FUND PROGRAM

       50. The Authority citation for part 990 continues to read as follows:

       Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1437¢; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
                                                                                                  99


         51. In § 990.150, revise paragraph (a) to read as follows:

§ 990.150 Limited vacancies.

         (a) Operating subsidy for a limited number of vacancies. HUD will pay operating subsidy

for a limited number of vacant units under an ACC. The limited number of vacant units must be

equal to or less than 3 percent of the unit months on a project-by-project basis based on the

definition of a project under § 990.265 of this part (provided that the number of eligible unit

months does not exceed 100 percent of the unit months for a project).

ok       ok     ok      ok      ok




Dated:




                                                   Nani Coloretti, Deputy Secretary

[FR-5743-F-03]
