                      VOLUNTARY         RESOLUTION AGREEMENT

     The McMinnville School District (the district) voluntarily agrees to take the following
     actions to resolve complaint Reference No. 10201073 filed with the U.S. Department of
     Education, Office for Civil Rights (OCR), under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of
     1973 (Section 504) and Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (Title II).

A.   Review of Policies and Procedures


     Action Item

        1. By October 31, 2020, in consultation with OCR as described in the reporting
           provisions below, the district will review and revise, as necessary, its policies and
           procedures (policies) to ensure that: students with disabilities are not treated
           differently from non-disabled students with respect to the length of the school day,
           unless a shortened school day is determined as necessary to meet the
           individualized needs of a particular student with a disability, and such decisions
           are made by a group of persons knowledgeable about the student, the student’s
           disability, evaluation data, and the student’s placement options. In particular, the
           district’s policies will ensure that students with disabilities who utilize specialized
           transportation will not leave school earlier than non-disabled students, due to their
           use of special education services or buses, unless it is determined individually
           necessary for the student.

     Reporting Requirements


        2.   By October 31, 2020, the district will provide OCR a copy of its draft
             policies, which it developed pursuant to Action Item A.1, for OCR’s review and
             approval. OCR will review the policies and notify the district if OCR identifies
             any revisions to the policies. If OCR identifies revisions, the district will submit
             revised policies within 30 days of receiving OCR’s notice of revisions. OCR and
             the district will repeat this process until OCR approves the policies.

        3.   Within 30 days of receiving OCR’s written approval of the policies, the district
             will provide OCR with documentation to show that it has adopted the policies.

B.   Notice and Training to Staff

     Action Items

        1.   Within 30 days of receiving OCR’s written approval of the policies developed
             under Action Item A.1, the district will provide notice to all staff regarding the
             policies. The notice may be made electronically.
Page 2 - OCR Reference No. 10201073

         2.     Within 60 days of receiving OCR’s written approval of the policies developed
                under Action Item A.1, the district will provide training on the policies to all
                teachers and staff who work with students with disabilities who use specialized
                transportation, as well as the principals, vice principals, and special education
                administrators.

      Reporting Requirements


         3.     Within 45 days of receiving OCR’s written approval of the policies developed
                under Action Item A.1, the district will submit to OCR a copy of the notice sent to
                employees pursuant to Action Item B.1.

              . Within 75 days of receiving OCR’s written approval of the policies developed
                under Action Item A.1, the district will submit a report to OCR describing the
                training provided pursuant to Action Item B.2. The report will contain, at a
                minimum: the date and time of the training; the name and qualifications of the
                person providing the training; a copy of the materials used to provide the training;
                a list of staff with position titles who attended the training; and for any required
                staff who were not able to attend the training, a description of the district’s plan to
                provide them with the training.

C.    Transportation Assessment

      Action Items

        1.      By September 30, 2020, for the 2019-2020 school year, the district will conduct an
                assessment of the specialized transportation provided to students with disabilities to
                determine whether students with disabilities are or were treated differently from
                non-disabled students related to early departures of specialized transportation. The
                district’s assessment will include information gathered from building
                administrators, parents or guardians, special education teachers and aides, and bus
                drivers regarding specialized transportation. The assessment will include:

                a) A review of each school’s dismissal time as established by the school’s bell
                     schedule;

                b) A review of the departure times for all district-provided modes of
                   transportation;

                c)   The identification of individual students with disabilities (those students who
                     have an IEP or Section 504 plan) who use specialized transportation;
Page 3 - OCR Reference No. 10201073


              d) For each student identified in Action Item C.1.c, a determination of whether
                 each student received a shortened school day due to the use of specialized
                 transportation services;

              e)   For each student identified in Action Item C.1.c, a determination of which
                   students received a shortened school day because it was required by that
                   student’s IEP or Section 504 plan; and

              f)   For those students who received a shortened school day that was not required
                   by that student’s IEP or Section 504 plan, a determination of the reasons why
                   each of the students received a shortened school day.

        2.    Based on the information collected under Action Item C.1, the district will develop
              a plan, with timeframes, to remedy any transportation issues identified by this
              assessment to ensure that all future specialized transportation services are
              provided to disabled students such that the transportation does not result in a
              shorter school day than the students’ non-disabled peers, unless the shortened
              school day has been determined as necessary for the student to receive a FAPE.

      Reporting Requirements


         3.   By November 30, 2020 the district will submit a report to OCR for review and
              approval documenting the results of its assessment. The report will include, but is
              not limited to, the information collected and analyzed under Action Item C.1,
              including bell schedules, transportation routes and schedules, lists of students,
              copies of each student’s IEP or Section 504, and a summary of problems identified
              during the assessment. The district will also submit to OCR for review and
              approval the plan that was developed under Action Item C.2 for remedying the
              problems that were identified. OCR will review the assessment and plan and
              notify the district if it requires any additional assessment or changes to the
              assessment or plan. The district will conduct any additional assessment or make
              changes to the plan within 20 days of receiving OCR’s notice of the additional
              assessment or plan changes. The district and OCR will repeat this process until
              OCR approves the assessment and the plan.

         A.   The district will submit a report to OCR within 30 days of its final implementation
              of the plan developed under Action Item C.2, containing information
              demonstrating that it completed implementation of the plan.
Page 4 - OCR Reference No. 10201073

D.    Compensatory Education and Services

      Action Items


             Within 45 days of receiving OCR’s written approval of the assessment and plan
             identified in Action Item C.3, the district will develop a comprehensive plan for
             all students identified in the assessment as receiving a shortened school day due
             to an early departure for specialized transportation that was not required in the
             students’ IEP or Section 504 plan during the 2019-2020 school year. The plan
             will provide for timely compensatory and/or remedial education services with a
             description of the method of compensatory and/or remedial services, the amount
             of time provided each student for the services, and the start and end dates for the
             provision of the services. The plan should take into account the lost instructional
             time, if any, that resulted in a denial of a free appropriate public education for the
             student and which services would be appropriate for the student to receive as
             compensation; as well as consider the total amount of instructional time lost for
             each student. The plan will have input by persons knowledgeable about each
             student and the student’s IEP or Section 504 plan.


            The district will offer the compensatory education identified in the plan to each parent(s)
            or guardian(s) of a student identified in the plan and provide the parents or guardians no
            less than 30 days to accept the plan.

            The district will implement the compensatory education and/or remedial services
            plan for each applicable student whose parents or guardians accept the district’s
            offer, within the timelines approved by OCR in the plan.

      Reporting Requirements


       4.   Within 45 days of receiving OCR’s written approval of the assessment and plan
            identified in Action Item C.3, the district will submit to OCR the compensatory
            education and/or remedial services plan identified under Action Item D.1. OCR
            will notify the district if it requires any changes to the plan. The district will
            submit a revised plan within 30 days of receiving notification of OCR’s changes.
            OCR and the district will repeat this process until OCR approves the plan.


            Within 10 days of receiving OCR’s written approval of the plan under Action Item
            D.1, the district will provide to OCR for review and approval a draft of the
            notification to parents of the available compensatory education and/or remedial
            services plan described in Action Item D.2. If OCR requires any changes to the
Page 5 - OCR Reference No. 10201073

                 notification, the district will make the changes and resubmit the notification to
                 OCR within 10 days of receiving notice of OCR’s changes. OCR and the district
                 will repeat this process until OCR approves the notification.

       6.        Within 10 days of receiving OCR’s written approval of the notification, the district
                 will submit to OCR verification that the notification was sent to all eligible parents
                 or guardians.

       7.        Within 30 days of completing the implementation of the compensatory education
                 and/or remedial services plan, the district will provide a report to OCR
                 documenting its implementation of the compensatory education and/or remedial
                 services plan for each student whose parents accepted the district’s offer under
                 Action Item D.3. The report will include at a minimum the dates, times and
                 locations that the compensatory instructional time was provided to students, the
                 name of the attending students, each student’s current school of enrollment, a
                 description of what instruction was provided to each student, and the names and
                 qualifications of the service providers. The report will also contain a list of the
                 parents or guardians who declined the district’s offer to provide additional
                 instructional time to their student or did not respond to the offer, and any reasons
                 provided by the parents or guardians for not accepting the additional instructional
                 time.


E.    General Monitoring Principles



            1.   This agreement resolves the allegations in OCR Reference No. 10201073 and does
                 not constitute an admission by the district of any violation of Section 504 or Title
                 II or any other law.

            2.   The district understands that by signing this agreement, it agrees to provide OCR
                 data and other information in a timely manner. Further, the district understands
                 that during the monitoring of this agreement, OCR may visit the district’s campus,
                 interview staff and students, and request such additional reports or data as are
                 necessary for OCR to determine whether the district has fulfilled the terms of this
                 agreement. Upon completion of the obligations under this agreement, OCR shall
                 close this case.

            3.   The district understands and acknowledges that OCR may initiate proceedings to
                 enforce the specific terms and obligations of this agreement and/or the applicable
                 statutes and regulations. Before initiating such proceedings, OCR shall give the
Page 6 - OCR Reference No. 10201073

             district written notice of the alleged breach and sixty (60) calendar days to cure the
             alleged breach.
                                                        _
Signed:

                 -   2
                     KA       et_
          bye
     Ye
 J
                                                         May 20, 2020
Dr. Maryalice Russell
Superintendent
McMinnville School District
