Oregon Housing and Community Services
Oregon Centralized Application (ORCA)



                       July 25, 2025



          Affordable Rental Housing Division

     725 NE Summer St NE Suite B Salem,            OR 97301
      Phone   (503) 986-2000 | Fax (503) 986-2020
                 www.oregon.gov/oncs




                    Version 2.1- July 25, 2025

                 Version 2.0 — February 27, 2025

                   Version 1.0- May 15, 2024




                                                              -            «
                                                              tt
                                                              |
                                                              OREGON HOUSING ond
                                                              COMMUNITY SERVICES
Table of contents
Table Of CONTENTS 0...              eee cccseceecesseseeeeceeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeseaeaeeeeeeeseaaaeeeeeeeseaaeeceeeeseaaaeceeeeseeaaaeceseeseeeeaaaeeees 2
Welcome to the Oregon Centralized Application (ORCA) ...........ccscsssscccccccceceecesssesesessenaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeseseeseeeees 3
   Funding sources available from OHCS ...........ccccccssssssnsneaeeceeeeeceeceseseceseeenaneaeeeeeeeesessesesseesesaeasaasaeeeeeeeeeesess 3

   SOt-ASIGES 0.2...            eeeeeecesenenne cee ce cee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaaaeaaeaeeeeeeeeeee
                                                                                                      ee eeaaaaaaaaaaaaeaeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeigs 6
   COSt CONTIOIS 0...            eee cteseecceceeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesaaaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeesaaaaaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesnigs 6
   COMPLIANCE 00... .eeecccccccceceeceeneeneeaeeeeeeeeeesesseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeGeeGaGaGG
                                                                             eas eeGssGsCEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEESEECESSEGEOEEEAS 11

   fVe}e) ier) 4(0]a 0] 0] 0-1: een                                                                                                       eee                       12

   DO YOU NAVE QUESTIONS? ......cccecccccccceceeceeneeaneeneeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeaeeaaeeeeaaeesssgsasseeeeeeeeeeees 14

Entry Point: Intake FOr                 .......ccccccccccccccceceeceeeeeneene
                                                   eee eeeseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeaeeaeeasaaaeeesegseeeeeeseeenenees 15

   About the Intake form... cccccssnececcessesenneeceeeesssaaeeeeeeeeeeaeaeeeeeeeseeeaeeeeeseseaaeeceeeesesaaeaeeseseneeaaaeeseeenenaaas 15
Step 1: IMpact ASSESSMENT ...... eee ecccceeseeeee cee eeeeeeceaeeeeeeaaaeeeeeeaaaeeeeeeaaaeeeeeeaaaeeeceaaaeeeecaaaeeeeaaaesesaaaeeeeeaaaeeees 18

   About the Impact ASSESSMENE STEP .......cceccececcceceeceeneeaeeeneeeseeeeseesseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeceeceeseeaeeaaeaaeaaeaees 18
   Impact Assessment evaluation Standards. ...........:cccccsssssssseseeeeeeceeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeaeeseeaaeeeesaaeaeseeeeseeeseeeeeeees 19

   Supplemental documents for Impact ASSESSMENL ...........cccceeeesennsnaceceeceeceeceeceseeseeseseasaaeeeeeeeeeeeeseseeseeees 32
Step 2: Financial Eligibility. ............ ccc ceccceeceececeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeae
                                                             eee eee eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeaeeaaeaaauaaaaaaaaes 33

   About the Financial Eligibility Step... eccccccccccncesnesnesnsessesseeeeeseeseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeeeeseeceeseeaseaaeaaeageaaes 33

   Financial Eligibility evaluation Standards ...............ccccsecsssssesceeceeceeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeaeeaeeaaeeeeeaeeaeeeegeseeeeseeeeeees 33

   Supplemental documents for Financial Eligibility ..............ccccccssssssssceceeceeceeceseeseeseeseseeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeseseeseeees 40
Step 3: COMMITMENL               0...     ee eeccccceeneeseeeeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
                                                         eee eeeeeeeee eee aaeeeeeeeeee eee ae eee eeeCeAGAA GAG EEEEEE CSA ;E; GEG EEEEE SCE SeEEEEHEES Al

   About the COMMITMENL STEP 0... eececcccccecceceeceeeeeneeneeane
                                             eae eee eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeceeseeaeaaeaaaaaaaaseaees 41

   Commitment evaluation Standards... cecsccccecceceeceeeeeeeseeeeeenaaeeaeeceeeeeeeeeeseesesaaaaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeneenees 41
   Supplemental documents for COMMITMENL 00.0... cee ccccceceeesssssesseeneeaeeceeceeeeeceseeseeseeeeeeeasasaeeseeeeeeeeseseeseeses 43
De@FINITIONS 200... eee ec ccecceeceeeeesneceeeeceeeeseaeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeesaaeaeeeeeeeseaaaeeceesesesaaeeceeeeseeaaaeeeeseneeaaas 44
General Terms and Conditions ............ccessscscccceceeceeeeeeeeeeseeeeeaaaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeaaaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeseeagaaaaeas 47




                                                                                                                                                                  -            «

                                                                                                                                                                  OREGON HOUSING    w
                                                                                                                                                                  COMMUNITY SERVICES
Welcome to the Oregon Centralized Application (ORCA)
The Oregon Centralized Application (ORCA) offers loan, grant, and tax credit funds to support the
development and capacity to develop and sustain affordable rental housing.

The ORCA provides applicable review for investment requests against adopted standards on a first-come,
first-reviewed basis with the goal of ensuring project readiness before a final commitment of funds is
awarded. Where resources are not available, the ORCA retains an active pipeline through a waitlist from
which future funds will be matched with eligible projects.    OHCS will publish detailed project progress
against development benchmarks.

The ORCA has one entry point followed by three application steps:

    e   Intake: This is the required entry point which gathers information from development teams on
        project concept, financial strategy, location, and team members. The Intake also directs requests
        for other offered funding to the associated review process, such as for offered capacity,
        predevelopment and land acquisition funds.


    e   Impact Assessment: Once a project at Intake submission passes an internal review, applicants
        can submit an Impact Assessment application focusing on non-financial requirements and policy
        objectives like equity, racial justice, community engagement, and partnerships. Depending on
        project readiness, this typically happens one to two years before financial closing. At this point, if
        resources are available OHCS brings a project recommendation for approval by Housing Stability
        Council which establishes a conditional hold of resources once the project meets all Impact
        Assessment evaluation standards. Where resources are not available to support the project
        financing, the project will be placed on a waitlist which serves as a pipeline for OHCS.


    e   Financial Eligibility: Once a project receives a conditional hold of funds, OHCS works with the
        applicant to evaluate the project’s financial proforma and supporting documentation for project
        costs, construction standards, and adherence to underwriting standards outlined in the OHCS
        General Policy and Guideline Manual (GPGM). Depending on project readiness, this step
        typically occurs about 6 months - one year before the proposed financial close date.


    e   Commitment: Once a project meets all Financial Eligibility evaluation standards, it can proceed
        to the Commitment step. The Commitment step requires that all Financial Eligibility due
        diligence evaluation standards are completed, and the project is within 6 to 9 months from the
        start of construction. Upon funding approval, the project must financially close by the agreed-
        upon financial closing date (within six months of reservation).


Funding sources available from OHCS
OHCS’ Affordable Rental Housing Division offers multiple funding sources to develop affordable rental
housing throughout Oregon. In the ORCA, OHCS matches projects with appropriate funding sources. Ifa
project requires a specific funding resource, an applicant can request that resource but will be
contingent on applicable resource availability. See details on eligible and ineligible costs.




                                                                                                            OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                            COMMUNITY SERVICES
Loan and grant programs
General Housing Account Program
The General Housing Account Program (GHAP) expands the state's housing options for low-income and
very low-income Oregonians up to 80% Area Median Income (AMI). GHAP resources support two
primary activities: developing or preserving affordable multifamily housing and strengthening the
capacity of OHCS’ partners to meet the state's affordable housing needs. For some projects, GHAP may
also be awarded as a grant rather than a loan.

Twenty-five percent of GHAP funds are allocated to support veterans (referred to as VGHAP).

GHAP Capacity Building Program
The GHAP Capacity Building Grant Program was created to support the growth and development of
community-based    nonprofit housing developers, local housing authorities, and Tribal housing entities to
meet their affordable rental housing development and operational priorities.

Home Investment Partnerships Program
The Home Investment Partnerships Program (HOME) provides federal funds from the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) to develop or preserve affordable housing up to 80% AMI. The
OHCS Affordable Rental Housing Division administers the HOME program for the State of Oregon,
allocating HOME resources to "balance of state" communities whose populations do not meet
population requirements to have their own direct allocation of HOME funding from HUD or has not
agreed to administer the funds locally. For some projects, HOME       may also be awarded as a loan rather
than a grant.

HOME-American Rescue Plan
Through the American Rescue Plan (ARP) Act of 2021, OHCS received an allocation of nearly $33 million
under the HOME Investment Partnerships Program (HOME) to increase housing stability for households
experiencing homelessness or at risk of homelessness. This program includes a 15% administrative cap
and must be completely disbursed by September 30, 2030. For some projects, HOME ARP may also be
awarded as a loan rather than a grant.

The Housing Development Grant Program
The Housing Development Grant Program (HDGP) was created to expand Oregon’s housing supply for
low- and very low-income families and individuals, up to 80% AMI, by providing funds for new
construction or to acquire and/or rehabilitate existing structures.

Land Acquisition Revolving Loan Program
The purpose of the Land Acquisition Revolving Loan Program (LAP) is to assist eligible organizations in
Oregon to purchase land suited for affordable housing development which must be repaid within 8 years
of investment.

Local Innovation and Fast Track — Rental
The Local Innovation and Fast Track (LIFT) Program aims to increase affordable housing in the state by
utilizing Article XI-Q funds for development of affordable family-sized units in historically underserved
communities, including communities of color and rural communities throughout Oregon. Adding net




                                                                                                             OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                             COMMUNITY SERVICES
affordable units to the housing stock can be done through new construction, takeout financing, and
acquisition of like-new market rate units. The LIFT rental program can serve households up to 60% AMI
and encourages innovation and replicability. LIFT can be used in certain instances to acquire market-rate
housing that is able to be converted to affordable housing. Units should be like-new along with other
requirements posted on the OHCS website. Projects must still go through the ORCA and must have
review periods, although requirements are specific to acquisition projects.

National Housing Trust Fund
The National Housing Trust Fund (HTF) is a federal formula grant program administered by states that is
intended to increase and preserve the supply of decent, safe, sanitary, and affordable housing, primarily
rental housing, for extremely low-income (30% AMI). HTF resources are generally paired with Permanent
Supportive Housing (PSH) capital resources (see above) for the development of PSH units. For some
projects, HTF may also be awarded as a loan rather than a grant.

Permanent Supportive Housing development capital
The Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH) Program utilizes Article XI-Q funds for the development of
deeply affordable housing paired with on-site comprehensive services designed to best support
households experiencing chronic homelessness throughout Oregon.

Permanent Supportive Housing services and rental assistance
Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH) is a best practice and proven strategy to stabilize people
experiencing chronic homelessness. In addition to PSH development capital, OHCS offers funding for
comprehensive, on-site, tenancy support services and project-based rental assistance.

Predevelopment Loan Programs
The Predevelopment Loan Program (PDLP) and the Feasibility Loan Program (PFLP) are designed to assist
with the costs of low-income housing projects prior to financial closing and final commitment of capital
funding resources through the ORCA process.




Tax credit programs
Low-Income Housing Tax Credit
The Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) Program provides federal tax credits for developers to
construct, rehabilitate, or acquire and rehabilitate qualified low-income rental housing. This program is
guided by the State’s Qualified Allocation Plan (QAP) and more detail on the LIHTC program and how to
apply for those resources specifically can be found in that document.

Oregon Affordable Housing Tax Credit
The Oregon Affordable Housing Tax Credit (OAHTC) Program provides a state income tax credit to lenders
for affordable housing loans. It applies to loans for which a lender reduces the interest rate by up to four
percent and passes on the savings in the form of reduced rents.

Agricultural Workforce Housing Tax Credit
The Agricultural Workforce Housing Tax Credit (AWHTC) Program offers a state income tax credit to cover
up to 50% of eligible costs to investors who incur costs to develop agricultural workforce housing.




                                                                                                          OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                          COMMUNITY SERVICES
Bond programs
Pass-through Revenue Bond Financing (Conduit) Program
This program uses state Private Activity Bond (PAB) authority to provide funding to build affordable,
multi-unit housing for low-income Oregonians and generates a 4% Low Income Housing Tax Credit when
more than 50% of the eligible project costs are financed with PAB. This program provides financing for
the construction, renovation, and purchase of housing. This resource is only available to projects that
have been awarded 4% Low-Income Housing Tax Credits.          As is documented in the QAP, in managing the
states’ PAB resource investments to support housing, OHCS will work annually with the Housing
Authorities of Oregon to establish a Housing Authority Owned (HAO) PAB Set-Aside. This HAO PAB Set-
Aside is eligible for projects that are owned   by Housing Authorities and do not require any state loan or
grant funding.

501c3 Bonds
This is a tax-exempt bond offering for nonprofit sponsors. Qualified 501c3 bonds do not require volume
cap and thus are not resource constrained. These loans do not rely on Private Activity Bond authority
and do not generate a 4% LIHTC. The proposed project must serve families earning at or below 120%
AMI.




Set-asides

The programs listed above provide the development funding that makes up the total funding available
through the ORCA process. Of this funding, OHCS has reserved or “set-aside” funding for specific
organizations and geographic regions to relieve the housing burden of historically underserved
populations and ensure investment in communities across Oregon.

Geographic set-aside funding aligns with the Oregon Housing Needs Analysis and housing cost burden of
historically underserved communities across the state. Set-asides for the 9% LIHTC program are slightly
different. The current set asides are published on the OHCS website.

OHCS will publish available resources within each set-aside monthly as resource holds are approved by
Housing Stability Council.



Cost controls

Cost evaluation
OHCS is committed to ensuring best use and maximum         impact of public funds. All projects must seek to
leverage public and private funds with state investments and provide OHCS with information as part of a
leverage review with those efforts.


To ensure proposed costs are reasonable, OHCS compares costs to significant data from our existing
portfolio and identifies project costs outside of expected ranges. If necessary to substantiate project




                                                                                                           OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                           COMMUNITY SERVICES
costs, OHCS may request a third-party cost justification. OHCS’ evaluation of costs include, but are not
limited to, the following:

    e   Assessing cost reasonability with a predictive cost model informed by available data and
        comparable projects.
    e   Requiring detailed cost estimates and tracking of project costs with detailed line items in the
        financial proforma, using the Uniformat Schedule of Values (SOV).
    e   Requiring submission of a cost analysis that provides potential strategies for reducing project
        costs.



Policy controls
OHCS continues to ensure efficient use of public funds by setting expectations for applicants that include,
but are not limited to, the following:

    e   Identifying the project elements that are fundamental to meeting the project’s intent and are
        not eligible for value engineering, such as playgrounds, meeting spaces, resident services, etc.
    e   Establishing a developer fee at the Financial Eligibility step that may not be increased throughout
        the life of the development project without appeal.
    e   Reviewing substantive changes to the project and ensuring such changes are appropriate and
        align with scope of the project.
    e = Prohibiting “cost savings clauses” that allow the contractor or developer to benefit from excess
        project resources, in alignment with national best practices to deter fraud and misuse of public
        funds.




                                                                                                           -            «

                                                                                                           OREGON HOUSING    w
                                                                                                           COMMUNITY SERVICES
Subsidy limits
The subsidy limits established for the ORCA are intended to:

    e   Scale according to bedroom size and AMI served,
    e   Respond to lower rent rates in rural communities with significantly lower AMI, which reduces
        the ability for projects to cover fixed costs of development,
    e   Include an additional building-level subsidy for projects that incorporate unique building design
        functions to serve the target population, and
    e   Allow for reasonable increases (up to 10% above subsidy limits) when projects approach the
        final commitment of resources, at OHCS discretion based on demonstrated financial need and
        resource availability, upon approval by the OHCS Finance Committee.



Additionally, OHCS may provide up to $200,000 per project where there is a unique, functional building
need to ensure tenant life/safety/health, including spaces to meet agricultural workforce needs,
accessibility factors for elderly or disabled populations, supporting children, or durability interventions
that tie specifically to the unique needs of the tenant population that the project will serve. Standard
amenities, community rooms and separately owned or financed co-location facilities do not qualify.

OHCS also offers up to $60,000 per project for a contracting equity consultant. See more under “Equity
in contracting strategy” in Impact Assessment and Financial Eligibility.

Units funded with OHCS PSH program resources are not subject to other ORCA subsidy caps and will be
evaluated in-line with current and historic project data alongside all scrutiny of financial review in
Financial Eligibility and in Underwriting. OHCS reserves the right to ask for further justification before
moving the project forward.

Projects utilizing project-based rental assistance (PBRA) are eligible for 30% AMI subsidy limits. OAHTCs
or other programs used to reduce rent levels without restricting units are not eligible for this increased
subsidy limit and must default to the actual AMI rent restriction tied to the units in their project.



Subsidy limits are outlined in the charts below.




Gap Only Subsidy Limits
“Gap Only” investments mean projects that are requesting subsidy without leverage of LIHTC equity.
The following subsidy limit tables are applicable to Gap Only projects. Gap Only investments should not
exceed $35 million, beginning with version 2.1 of the ORCA manual; further OHCS requests that projects
over 50 units evaluate a financing structure with LIHTC and provide a justification if they choose to
pursue without tax credit leverage.



        Gap Only Rural New Construction




                                                                                                              OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                              COMMUNITY SERVICES
  Incomes Served                                                  Studio     1 bedroom    2 bedroom    + Per-Bedroom
  (based on unit restrictions; PBRA units use 30% AMI)


                                                30%      AMI     $275,000    $335,000     $395,000          $60,000
                                                40%      AMI     $265,000    $325,000     $385,000          $60,000
                                                50%      AMI     $250,000    $300,000     $350,000          $50,000
                                                60%      AMI     $240,000    $290,000     $340,000          $50,000
                                                70%      AMI     $230,000    $280,000     $330,000          $50,000
                                                80%      AMI     $220,000    $270,000     $320,000          $50,000

Gap Only Rural Acquisition /
 Rehabilitation

 Incomes Served                                                    Studio    1 bedroom    2 bedroom    + Per-Bedroom
(based on unit restrictions; PBRA units use 30% AMI)


                                                  30%    AMI     $190,000     $250,000     $310,000          $40,000
                                                  40%    AMI     $175,000     $235,000     $295,000          $40,000
                                                  50%    AMI     $160,000     $210,000     $260,000          $35,000
                                                  60%    AMI     $145,000     $195,000     $245,000          $35,000
                                                  70%    AMI     $130,000     $180,000     $230,000          $35,000
                                                  80%    AMI     $115,000     $165,000     $215,000          $35,000



 Gap Only Urban New Construction

 Incomes Served                                                   Studio     1 bedroom    2 bedroom    + Per-Bedroom
 (based on unit restrictions; PBRA units use 30% AMI)



                                                 30%     AMI     $265,000     $325,000     $385,000          $60,000
                                                 40%     AMI     $250,000     $300,000     $350,000          $60,000
                                                 50%     AMI     $240,000     $290,000     $340,000          $50,000
                                                 60%     AMI     $230,000     $280,000     $330,000          $50,000
                                                 70%     AMII    $220,000     $270,000     $320,000          $50,000
                                                 80%     AMI     $210,000     $260,000     $310,000          $50,000


Gap Only Urban Acquisition /
Rehabilitation

Incomes Served                                                     Studio     1 bedroom    2 bedroom    + Per-Bedroom
(based on unit restrictions; PBRA units use 30% AMI)



                                                   30%    AMI     $175,000     $235,000     $295,000          $40,000
                                                   40%    AMI     $160,000     $210,000     $260,000          $40,000
                                                   50%    AMI     $145,000     $195,000     $245,000          $35,000
                                                   60%    AMI     $130,000     $180,000     $230,000          $35,000
                                                   70%    AMII    $115,000     $165,000     $215,000          $35,000
                                                   80%    AMI     $100,000     $150,000     $200,000          $35,000




                                                                                                                        OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                                        COMMUNITY SERVICES
Gap with 4% LIHTC Subsidy Limits
The following subsidy limit tables are applicable to projects that are accessing LIHTC resources. These
limits are for gap resources, not the tax credits themselves. 9% LIHTC projects include a per project
maximum       of $3 million.




      Gap for LIHTC Rural New Construction

      Incomes Served                                                       Studio    1 bedroom   2 bedroom   + Per-Bedroom
      (based on unit restrictions; PBRA units use 30% AMI)


                                                             30%   AMI    $210,000   $240,000    $270,000         $30,000
                                                             40%   AMI    $200,000   $230,000    $260,000         $30,000
                                                             50%   AMI    $190,000   $210,000    $230,000         $20,000
                                                             60%   AMII   $180,000   $200,000    $220,000         $20,000
                                                             70%   AMII   $170,000   $180,000    $190,000         $10,000
                                                             80%   AMI    $160,000   $170,000    $180,000         $10,000


      Gap for LIHTC Rural Acquisition /
      Rehabilitation

      Incomes Served                                                       Studio    1 bedroom   2 bedroom   + Per-Bedroom
      (based on unit restrictions; PBRA units use 30% AMI)


                                                             30%   AMI    $175,000    $195,000    $215,000        $20,000
                                                             40%   AMI    $155,000    $175,000    $195,000        $20,000
                                                             50%   AMI    $135,000    $150,000    $165,000        $15,000
                                                             60%   AMI    $115,000    $130,000    $145,000        $15,000
                                                             70%   AMI     $95,000    $105,000    $115,000        $10,000
                                                             80%   AMI     $75,000     $85,000     $95,000        $10,000



      Gap for LIHTC Urban New
      Construction

      Incomes Served                                                       Studio    1 bedroom   2 bedroom   + Per-Bedroom
      (based on unit restrictions; PBRA units use 30% AMI)



                                                             30%   AMI    $190,000   $220,000    $250,000         $30,000
                                                             40%   AMI    $180,000   $210,000    $240,000         $30,000
                                                             50%   AMI    $170,000   $190,000    $210,000         $20,000
                                                             60%   AMII   $160,000   $180,000    $200,000         $20,000
                                                             70%   AMII   $150,000   $160,000    $170,000         $10,000
                                                             80%   AMI    $140,000   $150,000    $160,000         $10,000




    Gap for LIHTC Urban Acquisition /
    Rehabilitation




                                                                                                                             OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                                             COMMUNITY SERVICES
    Incomes Served
    (based   on   unit restrictions;   PBRA   units use 30%   AMI)              Studio    1   bedroom    2   bedroom    ,   Per-Bedroom




                                                                     30% AMI   $155,000       $175,000       $195,000          $20,000
                                                                     40% AMI   $135,000       $155,000       $175,000          $20,000
                                                                     50% AMI   $115,000       $130,000       $145,000          $15,000
                                                                     60% AMI    $95,000       $110,000       $125,000          $15,000
                                                                     70% AMI    $75,000        $85,000        $95,000          $10,000
                                                                     80% AMI    $55,000        $65,000        $75,000          $10,000




*Note — these subsidy limits may be overridden if in conflict with other programmatic requirements and
regulations.




Compliance
A compliance monitoring fee sufficient to cover OHCS’ due-diligence costs is required annually. This fee
may be adjusted over time by OHCS. Additional monitoring fees may apply depending upon the type of
funding awarded to a project. Monitoring addresses elements of project operation, including but not
limited to:

    e        Initial household income verification
    e        Utility allowances
    e        Annual income verification, including self-certification
    e        Risk-based physical inspections every one to three years based on project condition
    e        Permanent Supportive Housing program monitoring for services and rental assistance, if
             applicable
    e        If other public capital or operating subsidy is used from any source, relevant compliance
             requirements of those sources are assumed to apply. For example, if 4% LIHTCs are used, all 4%
             LIHTC compliance requirements apply, and if HTF resources are used, HTF compliance
             requirements apply.




                                                                                                                                          OREGON   HOUSING       w!
                                                                                                                                          COMMUNITY   SERVICES
Application process
The first step of the funding process is to submit an Intake Form. This web-based form can be accessed
through OHCS’ website. OHCS’ application team, technical advisors, and program staff evaluate
completed forms and determine if a project can move on to the application steps of the funding process.

Upon approval to move forward, applicants receive credentials to access their Procorem WorkCenter,
where they have access to the evaluation standards, tasks, and supplementary documents related to the
Impact Assessment, Financial Eligibility, and Commitment steps. The Procorem WorkCenter includes
tasks related to each evaluation standard that both the applicant and OHCS staff need to check-mark
when complete.

While applicants are only evaluated for the application step in which they are working to meet all
evaluation standards, they are not precluded from submitting ready documents or evaluation standards
that are in future application steps. OHCS will not review these documents for approval until the
applicant has reached the appropriate application step. OHCS reserves the right to make any updates to
process, criteria, or standards listed below at its sole discretion.

Developers or Co-Developers may not have more than two projects, excluding preservation projects, in
any one application step at a time (Impact Assessment, Financial Eligibility, and Commitment). This
criterion requires the project select   a Developer to access to a WorkCenter.


    e   Portfolio Stabilization applications that have been approved by an Asset Manager and have
        completed a Property Improvement Plan (PIP) are exempt from this policy.



For LIFT Acquisition projects, the required standards and supplemental materials are different. Please
see your WorkCenter for a checklist of required standards and supplementals for this activity.

For projects seeking 9% LIHTC, there is an additional requirement to submit a 9% LIHTC Request Form
that will be competitively evaluated before moving projects into the Impact Assessment. Criteria and
process for the 9% Request Form can be found in the QAP. Applicants moving forward with 9% LIHTC
applications after approval of their Request Form must meet all program requirements for application
timing, including carryover timing requirements as described in the QAP.




Waitlist Policy
If OHCS subscribes all available or eligible resources for either a specific funding source needed by a
project or for a set-aside region or category in which the project is located, applications are placed ona
waitlist. OHCS will continue to accept application Intake Forms to continue to establish a funding
pipeline. Staff will continue to move eligible Intake applications into Impact Assessment as applicants
desire, and they will continue to review completed Impact Assessment applications.

Projects are placed on the waitlist in order of final completed and correct Impact Assessment
application. If an application is sent back to the sponsor for updates, the cure process outlined in the
section below applies to determine positioning on the waitlist. OHCS will retain and publish the active
waitlist monthly. On a six-month cadence, OHCS will require Applicants to review and update application




                                                                                                           OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                           COMMUNITY SERVICES
submissions and information within the Project WorkCenter in order to maintain their position on the
waitlist. If a project has been on the waitlist for less than six months at the time OHCS requests
application recertifications, it will be exempt from having to update until the next recertification period if
it is still on the waitlist at that time. There is no maximum   length of time that a project may stay on the
waitlist, however material changes (as defined in the financial eligibility step) will require   a new
application and removal from the waitlist.

When there is additional funding made available, OHCS will directly notify projects on the waitlist in
order of their place on the waitlist about the funding. Projects have two weeks from that notification to
indicate to OHCS that they are ready to accept the recommended          resources and to update materials as
necessary to move to a Housing Stability Council approval. If a project can meet all updated ORCA
requirements and the project is still deemed feasible based on standards approved initially at impact
assessment, a project will not lose their place on the waitlist.

The maximum     of two projects in Impact Assessment still applies, and projects on the waitlist are not
exempt from that requirement, exclusive of preservation projects. Developers may remove a project
from the waitlist and bring a different one into Impact Assessment at any time, if desired. This policy is
intended to ensure that the projects on the waitlist are the priority projects for each organization that
are most ready to proceed based on available resources. OHCS reserves the right to waive this
requirement at its own discretion in cases where resources for specific project types or populations are
at risk of being underutilized.

Cure Process
If an application does not meet a standard, OHCS will allow a cure period of 10 business days for
applicants to respond to and address any identified issues. The cure period begins at the end of the
standard 30-day standards evaluation period. Applicants may choose to respond sooner than 10
business days if they resolve the issues sooner. After receiving the applicant’s response, OHCS has up to
10 business days to review the updates and determine whether the issues have been resolved. During
the cure period and review, an applicant’s initial submission date remains intact.

If there is a successful resolution and the application meets all standards after the cure period and
review, the application moves forward into the waiting list with their position determined by their initial
submission date or proceed to Housing Stability Council if there are available resources for the project. If
there are unresolved issues after OHCS review and the application still fails to meet standards, the
application returns to the Impact Assessment step, the original submission date is lost, and the
application must be fully resubmitted as a new application. Upon a resubmission,        a new 30-day OHCS
standard evaluation period will commence.

Application Charges
Applicants must submit an application charge of the lesser of $2,500 or 0.5% of the total funds,
requested upon submission of their Impact Assessment application. Applicants are invoiced through
their WorkCenter after submission of their completed Impact Assessment application submission. The
WorkCenter provides instructions on how to submit electronic payments for application charges. For the
full schedule of required charges, see the General Policy and Guideline Manual (GPGM).




                                                                                                                OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                                COMMUNITY SERVICES
Do you have questions?
For questions about the ORCA, submit your questions to the
ORCA Question and Feedback Portal

For questions about the Impact Assessment, Financial Eligibility, or Commitment step applications, email
App.Team@hcs.oregon.gov.

For questions about technical assistance, email Technical.Advisors@hcs.oregon.gov




                                                                                                      -            «
                                                                                                      tt
                                                                                                      OREGON HOUSING wow!
                                                                                                      COMMUNITY SERVICES
                                Entry Point: Intake Form


About the Intake form

The Intake Form is the entry point for the application process. All projects are required to begin with
the Intake Form. This helps OHCS provide projects with early support, build our pipeline of affordable
housing projects, and forecast funding requests.

The brief, web-based Intake Form includes an overview of the project vision and the partners involved, a
preliminary site assessment, and early questions such as the proposed number and configuration of
units, population served, an initial estimate of resource needs and timing, and predevelopment funding
needs and eligibility.

The Intake Form collects information from development teams in the earliest stages of their projects,
with the goal of providing early project details to the State to establish a prospective pipeline and
support resource requests. It serves as the gateway to predevelopment funding and can help OHCS
assess project locations and communicate with public funders. Additionally, it identifies the best-fit
resources and connects project teams with technical advisors for support.

It is through the centralized intake process that requests are directed to the responsive review process:

    -   New Construction, Acquisition, and Rehab requests: Applicants should submit an Intake Form
        as early as the initial concept stage of a project, this could be 2-5 years before applying for
        funding. The form is intended for organizations that are seriously considering a project and may
        have already incurred due diligence expenditures.


    -   Preservation requests: When     an application is identified in Intake as a preservation project, the
        applicant will be asked to supply supporting documentation necessary to assign the project an
        initial priority rating under the preservation criteria for that specific preservation category (See
        the Funding Overview for specific details on the categories and criteria).    OHCS staff will review
        those materials, assign an initial preservation priority, and communicate this rating to the
        applicant, who then may proceed to Impact Assessment.


    -   Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH) rent assistance and services: Applications that have
        already received capital funding resources from OHCS and are seeking to add PSH rent assistance
        and services funding to their project must submit an Intake Form indicating this interest.
        Applicants will work with the PSH Program Manager to apply for these resources. This funding is
        only available to sponsors who have completed the PSH Institute and have already received
        capital funding from OHCS. The following items must be completed and submitted to the
        applicant’s Procorem WorkCenter to be considered for either a PSH project-based rent
        assistance or services funding award:
            o   Anupdated operating proforma for the site, showing OHCS rent assistance as income (if
                being requested) and showing positive cash flow for the next 15 years
            o   Aproperty income statement/balance sheet




                                                                                                               OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                               COMMUNITY SERVICES
            o    Evidence of commitment for any external resources for services funding or rental
                 assistance
                 Development Team Capacity Worksheet

            O
                 PSH Standards Form
            90
                 PSH services narrative questions
            0


                 PSH services budget (on OHCS template)
            Oo




    -   Predevelopment funding: OHCS’ Predevelopment Loan Program includes two loan products for
        projects in the development funding pipeline that have completed the requirements of the
        Intake Form. The Intake Form asks respondents to indicate interest in predevelopment funding.
        OHCS staff will then follow up with the applicant to determine whether the interest aligns with
        the Feasibility Loan product or Predevelopment Loan product and send application materials as
        necessary based on early assessment of eligibility and need. Complete application procedures
        and program details and requirements for funding are included in the Predevelopment Loan
        Program Manual.


    -   GHAP Capacity Building Grants: General Housing Account Program (GHAP) capacity building
        funds are made available by OHCS to support the growth and development of nonprofit housing
        developers, local housing authorities, Native nation (Tribal) housing entities, and local
        governments in meeting our shared goals in affordable multifamily rental housing development
        and operations.    The ORCA Capacity Building (ORCA CB) Grants, funded through GHAP, are for
        activities and resources needed to bring an organization or region to the next level of
        operational, programmatic, financial, or comprehensive development so it may effectively
        advance development of an affordable multifamily rental housing project or ensure long-term
        viability of an existing project or portfolio of properties. The ORCA CB Grant application is
        accessed through the ORCA Intake Form which requests information about:
            o   Uses include (but are not limited to):
            o    Strengthening organization and regional capacity to build and operate Affordable Rental
                 Housing
                 Innovative solutions to address capacity needs
            0




                 Evaluations and assessments to identify strategic next steps
            0




                 Building ARH-related skills, knowledge, and networks
            0




                 Specific grant offerings are made available through the ORCA and grant opportunities
            Oo




                 are shared through OHCS Technical Advisories.


    -   Portfolio Stabilization Initiative (PSI): The portfolio stabilization initiative (PSI) fund will help
        maintain existing affordable housing units in the OHCS portfolio that are not near the end of
        their useful life or affordability period but are facing the risk of imminent loss. Dedicated
        Portfolio stabilization funds will allow OHCS to support emergency interventions for these types
        of troubled properties where other preservation options are not qualified or have been
        exhausted.

Fill out the Intake Form   now.




                                                                                                                OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                                COMMUNITY SERVICES
Technical Advisors
OHCS Technical Advisors (TAs) can help applicants navigate the complex project development and
financing landscape. TAs can help developers:

    e   Navigate the ORCA application process,
    e   Identify resource fits, including OHCS predevelopment loans, capacity building grants, and
        consultant referrals,
    e   Get feedback on project concepts and financing strategies.




                                                                                                     -            «
                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                     OREGON HOUSING wow!
                                                                                                     COMMUNITY SERVICES
                                Step 1: Impact Assessment
About the Impact Assessment Step
For development funding, the Impact Assessment application provides OHCS with key information about
the project to review alignment with policy priorities. This step focuses on due-diligence items and
thoughtful strategies to achieve objectives, as well as the project's impact and non-financial
requirements, evaluating its ability to meet funding requirements and adhere to policy standards. It
offers a conditional commitment for resources based on project performance and allows for
resubmission if the initial requirements are not met.

This step secures a conditional Letter of Intent from OHCS, which holds resources for projects, allows
OHCS to ensure the project meets Impact Assessment step evaluation standards, and prepares the
project for the Financial Eligibility and Commitment steps. This step also allows OHCS staff to determine
the specific resources that a project is assigned.

The Impact Assessment step should be initiated no more than 1-2 years before closing. All applications
must pass through the Impact Assessment step. While there is no definitive timeframe for a project to
have to submit their materials for this step, if a project has been inactive in the Impact Assessment step
for 12 months, they will be contacted and have their materials refreshed if necessary or have their
WorkCenter deleted if the project is no longer viable. Any Partnership Agreements, including MOUs for
service providers, must be dated within the last year or have signed documentation (an email
confirmation is acceptable) from all parties agreeing to extend the agreement that has been dated
within the last 12 months.




Connecting to existing programs
OHCS staff determine a project’s eligibility for resources based on characteristics described at the Impact
Assessment step. For most projects, a tentative determination of a resource pathway, dependent on
resource availability, occurs at this point. Some project types (e.g. transitional housing, new construction
projects under 5 units, group homes, Assisted Living Facilities, etc.) are not eligible for any current
resources OHCS has available through the ORCA.

In some cases, OHCS may need more information to definitively assign a specific resource, particularly
when one specific resource is being requested or the resource has unique or prescriptive program
requirements. For example, to request resources from OHCS’ Permanent Supportive Housing program,
the project or the developer must have previously attended the Oregon Supportive Housing Institute,
and the project must utilize a project-based rental subsidy for PSH units, provide comprehensive on-site
supportive services, and utilize a regional Coordinated Entry system to fill PSH units.

Other program-specific requirements can be found in term sheets on the OHCS website. We strongly
recommend that applicants apply with a willingness to be flexible and accept a different resource than
originally requested or a combination of OHCS resources, as this flexibility may allow for an expedited
funding process.

Applications for preservation resources are prioritized based on the     Preservation Funding Framework.




                                                                                                           OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                           COMMUNITY SERVICES
Impact Assessment evaluation standards
The following evaluation standards are required to be met at the Impact Assessment step.

Applicants are required to meet all evaluation standards to indicate to OHCS that they are ready to move
to the next step. Applicants set their own timeline for completing these evaluation standards and move
at different speeds.

OHCS does not prescribe any pace for getting through application steps, however; inactivity or failure to
make progress on meeting evaluation standards for a period of 12 months will remove a project from the
application process and require them to restart at Intake.    OHCS considers inactivity or failure to make
progress during the Impact Assessment step as not responding to department within the allowable cure
process timeframe (Cure Process).

In addition, applicants must submit other supplemental documents not associated with these evaluation
standards. See the list in your Procorem WorkCenter for details.




Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plan
All applicants must submit     a complete and thorough Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plan (AFHMP)
for their project. The AFHMP    is a form that exists as a part of the Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing
(AFFH) policies adopted by OHCS.     The form helps applicants identify the communities least likely to
apply for housing based on the area’s demographics, which could include various communities of color,
people with disabilities, or other communities, and it helps applicants formulate a marketing strategy for
those communities.

Instructions for submittal:

    e   Submit the completed Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plan Form through your Procorem
        WorkCenter.



Requirement to meet this standard:

    e   Applicant has submitted a complete and detailed Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plan.




Architectural plans
New construction
The application includes narrative questions, and a conceptual site plan from the project’s architect is
required. Total conceptual hard costs are evaluated against the project description and conceptual site
plan. See the Core Development Manual (CDM) for more information.

Instructions for submittal:

    e   Respond to the narrative question in the application.




                                                                                                               OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                               COMMUNITY SERVICES
    e   Review the CDM Supplemental in the Blank Templates and Forms folder of your WorkCenter.
    e   Submit a conceptual site plan according to the CDM     Chapter 3.2, Section 3.2.02-N01.
    e   Submit unit size and visitability variance requests (if applicable) using the CDM-Form-A-VR-11-
        2019 found in your Procorem WorkCenter. Submit one form for each variance request.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e   Total conceptual hard costs align with the project description and conceptual site plan from the
        project’s architect provided.

Rehabilitation/Preservation
Submission of a capital needs assessment (CNA) meeting the specifications outlined in Appendix B.1 of
the Core Development Manual (CDM) is required, along with a description of the project scope
addressing the critical and immediate needs identified in the CNA. Total conceptual hard costs are
evaluated against the project description and conceptual site plan. A CNA is not required for acquisition
only preservation projects or projects proposing complete redevelopment where all existing affordable
units will be demolished and replaced.     Applicants should consider the resource availability and current
resource waitlist in making decisions about investing in this application.

Instructions for submittal:

    e   Respond to the Rehabilitation/Preservation related narrative questions in the Impact
        Assessment application.    Submit the completed Impact Assessment application when all sections
        of the application are complete.
    e   Review the CDM Supplement located in the Blank Templates and Forms folder of your
        WorkCenter.
    e   Complete and submit CDM form A-GC1 Sustainability Part 1 according to guidance given in Part
        7 of the CDM.
    e   Develop and submit a proposed Rehabilitation Scope of Work and Construction Cost Estimate
        according to CDM Appendix P1 Section P1.02c.
    e   Submit a Capital Needs Assessment (CNA) in accordance with CDM Appendix B.1.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e   Total conceptual hard costs align with the project description and conceptual site plan from the
        project’s architect provided.
    e   Ensure the CNA included aligns with other timeline expectations, and proposed project scope
        addresses the critical and immediate needs identified in the CNA.

At this point, OHCS will confirm whether the CNA supports the original preservation priority rating or
update the project preservation rating based on the submitted information.




Construction costs
Applicants must describe how they derived construction costs, how they will address potential risks, and
a plan for covering costs outside of contingency funds.

Instructions for submittal:




                                                                                                          OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                          COMMUNITY SERVICES
    e   Respond to the narrative questions in the application.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e   Applicant has provided a development schedule (in the proforma) with committed dates for
        construction start, substantial completion, and final completion, as well as a prescribed lease-up
        threshold that aligns with OHCS’ expectations for the development timeline.
    e   Applicant has provided estimates for construction costs and a rationale for how they were
        derived (e.g., bid received, early consultation with general contractor, comparable completed
        projects plus inflation). Include in narrative if any third parties were consulted.
    e   Applicant has included a list of known project- and market-related risks in application narrative.
    e   Applicant has included options for covering costs that may be incurred in excess of contingency
        funds.




Development team capacity
This standard asks about the capacity and experience of the project’s developer, sponsor, architect,
general contractor, and management company.          Each section must be completed by an authorized
officer of each respective entity.   Applicants must submit a completed questionnaire including certain
types of projects completed within specified time frames. Additionally, applicants must disclose and, if
relevant, explain a set of unacceptable practices.

OHCS reserves the right to require any additional information, including financial information, deemed
necessary to complete its review.

Instructions for submittal:

    e   Submit the Development Team Capacity Worksheet to your Procorem WorkCenter.             Each entity
        must respond to their respective questions.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e   OHCS evaluates the development team to ensure sufficient staff capacity and experience.
        Additionally, OHCS reserves discretionary authority to reject applications and deny project
        funding requests based on the criteria outlined in Section 1.11 of the General Terms and
        Conditions.



Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Organizational Commitments (DEI Agreement)
OHCS has developed a web-based registry for sponsors to submit their organizational DEI Agreement.
Applicants must register a living agreement that is updated annually.

Project owners, developers, and developer consultants complete a short online survey. In this survey,
partners select 4 out of 15 options for DEI goals. After establishing a baseline for DEI, partners self-report
progress on their selected goals annually by submitting a renewal agreement.

Learn more about the DEI Agreement, access information and resources, and submit the agreement to
the registry on OHCS’s DEI webpage.




                                                                                                              OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                              COMMUNITY SERVICES
Instructions for submittal:

    e       Submit your initial DEl Agreement or submit your renewal agreement if your organization has
            not already done so within the calendar year.
    e       Upload supplemental documents to Procorem WorkCenter (if requested).

Requirement to meet this standard:

        e   =Initial or annual DEI Agreements have been submitted to the registry.




Engagement and community needs
Applicants describe tenant engagement and how feedback informed project design, amenities, and
services provided. Applicants are asked about engagement efforts with the tenant communities the
project plans to serve, including communities of color, and how project teams incorporated what they
learned into building design. Project teams are welcome to conduct their own engagement as well as to
draw on existing sources of community needs published by agencies and community-based
organizations.

Instructions for submittal:

    e       Respond to the narrative questions in the application.
    e       Upload supporting documentation to Procorem WorkCenter (where applicable).

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e       Applicant demonstrates shared learnings, either from their own engagement or document(s) by
            one or more local entities (citing specific documents).
    e       Applicant describes engagement plans suited to the project and tenant communities to be
            served.
    e       Applicant demonstrates they have integrated feedback from tenant communities to be served in
            a way that ensures the project design reflects the tenant population’s identities and needs and is
            culturally responsive to communities of color.




Environmental reports
Applicants must submit complete environmental reports (ESA Phase | or II) conducted no more than 6
months prior to submission or provide a plan for completing reports within appropriate timelines.

This standard is not applicable for LIFT Acquisition applications.

Instructions for submittal:

    e       Respond to the questions in the application.
    e       Upload environmental reports to your Procorem WorkCenter (where applicable).

Requirement to meet this standard:

One of the following is true:




                                                                                                           OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                           COMMUNITY SERVICES
    e   Applicant has submitted complete environmental reports, or
    e   Applicant has identified a need for environmental reports and described a clear plan for
        completion including partners, timeframe, and contingency plans, that aligns with other
        established timeframes for the development process.



Equity and Racial Justice (ERJ) strategy
This standard creates a baseline that all projects must meet toward achieving racial equity in the projects
OHCS funds, and it provides a flexible way for projects to work toward additional goals that apply to their
projects and regional contexts. This section includes quantitative and qualitative questions to allow for
flexibility and equitable application in different situations. This section is distinct from, but
complementary to, the DEI Agreement and the Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plan.

Instructions for submittal:

    e   Respond to the narrative questions in the application, including four required items and two
        additional items from a list of four options.
    e   Upload supporting documentation to your Procorem WorkCenter (where applicable).

Requirement to meet this standard:

Applicant has both:

    e   Responded to the four required items:
             o   If applicant does not have existing properties in the OHCS portfolio, or the properties in
                 OHCS portfolio are not currently required to provide tenant demographic data to OHCS’s
                 Compliance team, provide tenant demographic data disaggregated by race and ethnicity
                 for the five most recently placed in service properties in their portfolio. If this is not
                 available, applicant must provide detailed explanation of how they plan to meet this
                 requirement with this project. Any applicant with projects in OHCS’s portfolio that are
                 out of compliance with this requirement will not meet this criterion.
             o   Applicant provides the list of languages identified in the AFHMP and a plan for
                 translating lease-up documents, outreach materials, and other appropriate materials.
             o   Applicant provides the list of languages identified in the AFHMP and describes how
                 property management will work with tenants who speak those languages, including
                 whether property managers speak those languages and how property managers will
                 translate written materials and other messages into those languages throughout the
                 course of their work.
             o   Applicant provides documentation related to the organization’s existing racial equity
                 efforts that both relate to racial equity specifically and include actionable steps that
                 move beyond value statements.
    e   Responded to two of four additional items in ways that demonstrate the following for selected
        items:
             o   For projects selecting “culturally specific organization ownership,” a Culturally Specific
                 Organization is either the majority owner or sole sponsor, or Culturally Specific
                 Organization is a minority owner and has right to exercise option to purchase at year 15,




                                                                                                              OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                              COMMUNITY SERVICES
                    or Culturally Specific Organization is a minority owner and is first in the waterfall for
                    deferred developer fee. All partnership agreements must be evidenced by legally binding
                    agreements to qualify for this category.
                o   For projects selecting “actionable plans for BIPOC-owned business utilization,” applicant
                    provides one or more examples of development projects completed with COBID-
                    certified Minority-owned Business Enterprise (MBE) or other BIPOC-owned          businesses
                    (does not need to be affordable housing) and describes plans to utilize BIPOC-owned
                    businesses in this project.
                o   For projects selecting “culturally specific services,” applicant is planning for resident
                    services appropriate to the specific intended tenant communities, including
                    Communities of Color.
                o   For projects selecting “tenant outcomes by race and ethnicity,” applicant provides data
                    on their portfolio’s tenant outcomes disaggregated by race and ethnicity, including, at a
                    minimum, eviction rates and tenancy lengths. Upload this data to your Procorem
                    WorkCenter and provide any context or explanation.

Equity in contracting strategy
In its Equity in Contracting Manual (February 2025), which is incorporated into this ORCA Manual by this
reference, OHCS has established targets for contracting with firms owned by minorities, women, and
veterans as well as emerging small businesses. Regional percentage targets refer to the percentage of
total contract dollars awarded to firms owned by minorities, women, and veterans, as well as emerging
small businesses — both those certified by COBID and those that self-identify as such. These targets vary
by Equity in Contracting Region: 30% for Region 1 (Portland Metro area, including Multnomah,
Clackamas, Washington, Hood River, and Columbia counties), and 20% for Regions 2-5 (rest of Oregon).

These firms include those certified by the Certification Office for Business Inclusion and Diversity (COBID)
as Minority Business Enterprise (MBE), Women          Business Enterprise (WBE), Veteran Business Enterprise
(VBE), and Emerging Small Business (ESB). In addition, the project team may include firms that are not
yet certified by COBID if the firms meet the eligibility criteria for the relevant certification established by
the COBID office and are encouraged to complete their certification with the COBID office by the end of
construction.

Additional information is available on OHCS’ Equity in Contracting webpage. Project teams can view their
performance on past OHCS-funded         projects on the Equity in Contracting Project Performance tracker.

Funded project teams will submit an initial equity in contracting report (due within 30 days of financial
close), a second report at 50% construction completion, and a final report (due within 30 days of
construction close).

OHCS allows up to $60,000 in additional subsidy for contracting equity consultants. Contracting equity
consultants provide services including, but not limited to, supporting outreach to subcontractors,
reviewing proposed subcontractors to see if they are COBID-certified or eligible, coordinating or
managing relationships with chosen subcontractors, administration and reporting for contracting equity
requirements, and other strategies for equitable contracting. Project teams can work with any consultant
they choose that provides these services.




                                                                                                                  OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                                  COMMUNITY SERVICES
At the Impact Assessment step, project teams will indicate if they are planning to work with a
contracting equity consultant, how much funding they anticipate requesting (up to $60,000), and which
consultant they plan to work with, if identified.

Instructions for submittal:

    e    Respond to the questions in the application.
    e    Upload supporting documentation to your Procorem WorkCenter, if applicable.

Requirement to meet this standard:

All of the following are true:

    e   Applicant has confirmed their understanding of and commitment to meeting the requirements
         of the Equity in Contracting Manual.
    e   Applicant has thoroughly answered all questions in the application.
    e   Applicant has uploaded supporting documentation, if applicable.




Financial proforma for Impact Assessment step
The financial proforma for the Impact Assessment step conveys a foundational understanding of overall
project information, including location, development team, cost estimates, unit mix, and target
population.

The financial components at this step are intended to be early estimates that serve as a starting point to
understand needs for this project. Estimates should be realistic. Any commitments made at this step of
the application are the basis of a conditional hold of funding. As such, substantive changes to what is
provided at this step will result in loss of that hold and will require the applicant to resubmit their Impact
Assessment application with updated project information.

Instructions for submittal:

    e    Upload the ARH ORCA Financial Proforma — Impact Assessment to your Procorem WorkCenter.
    e    Upload letters of interest or award letter for committed funds to your Procorem WorkCenter, if
         applicable.
    e   Submit PBV—HUD           approval timeline acknowledgment. Note that submitting this documentation
         triggers the HUD federal nexus and choice-limiting actions.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e    Proforma submitted with the following items completed or met:
              o    Project details
                   Development schedule
              0




                   Rents and incomes
              0




                   Balanced sources and uses
              0




                   Realistic sources (no fundraising)
              0




                   General unit breakdown with AMI percentages
              0




                   LOI or award letter for committed funds
              oO




                                                                                                           OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                           COMMUNITY SERVICES
               o   Closing date timing is realistic
    e    Financial information must meet all standards in the General Policy and Guideline Manual
         (GPGM).



Housing and Urban Development (HUD) requirements review
Applicants interested in funding from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
HOME    Investment Partnerships Program (HOME) or Housing Trust Fund (HTF) must review the following
requirements. Should OHCS determine that the project is a good candidate for HOME or HTF funding,
the program manager will contact the applicant to work with them on requirements listed on the OHCS
HOME/HTF webpage.

Instructions for submittal:

    e    If you are required to complete any of the federal cross-cutting requirements, please submit all
         required documents to your Procorem WorkCenter.
    e    Upload the HOME       Program Supplemental Form or HTF Program Supplemental Form to your
         Procorem WorkCenter, if applicable.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e    If selected for HOME/HTF funding, applicants have confirmed they have reviewed this
         information.
    e    If there are any requirements needed to be met to obtain federal funding, applicant must
         coordinate with the HOME/HTF         Program manager to ensure compliance.



Infrastructure readiness
Applicants note if specific infrastructure, such as stormwater, water, and sewer, is available at the site or
able to be extended to the site. Applicants also describe other infrastructure, including off-site elements,
that may be needed. Applicants identify a plan, including funding sources, to meet infrastructure needs
if required.

This standard is not applicable for LIFT Acquisition applications.

Instructions for submittal:

    e    Respond to the questions in the application.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e    Identify infrastructure needs.
    e    Have infrastructure in place or have a plan with city and/or other parties, including funding
         sources if needed, to meet infrastructure needs within a timeline that meets OHCS’ readiness
         expectations.




                                                                                                           OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                           COMMUNITY SERVICES
Location preferences
The location of affordable housing is an important consideration in property selection. Tenants must
have access to critical resources and amenities that allow them to thrive in a healthy environment and
stable community, in locations with conditions that can boost their economic and social mobility, while
narrowing racial and ethnic inequities. Additionally, we must capture opportunities to preserve housing
in locations where populations are vulnerable to displacement.

OHCS acknowledges that thriving looks different in every community, so this standard is structured as a
list of options. All project locations must meet a minimum of two of the of the six Opportunity Area
criteria or be in an area meeting a minimum      of two of the criteria on the OHCS     Anti-Displacement Index.

All projects must meet the threshold minimum criteria to meet this standard, and we encourage
partners to utilize all the options below when evaluating project sites.

Opportunity Area criteria
Include identified locations below on submitted vicinity map:

        1.   Urban Areas: Parks and public spaces within a half (1/2) mile
             Non-Urban Areas: Parks and public spaces within 10 miles

             Alternative option: Integrated playground, communal outdoor space, or similar green space
             option approved by OHCS in the proposed property design.



        2.   Urban Areas: Grocery store within a half (1/2) mile
             Non-Urban Areas: Grocery store within 10 miles


             Alternative option: Regular farmer’s market within a half (1/2) mile, or other accessible
             options for fresh food and produce as approved by OHCS.

        3.   Urban Areas: Walk Score over 70 (https://www.walkscore.com/score/)
             Non-Urban Areas: Walk Score over 50 (httos://www.walkscore.com/score/)


             Alternative option: Other access options that are not driving, as approved by OHCS.
             Examples could include a comparably high bike score, scooter or e-bike access on site, or
             regular van shuttle access to critical locations.


        4.   Urban Areas: Transit Oriented Development; if the project’s property is any of the following:
             zoned by a city to foster transit-supportive development, or can be accessed by frequent bus
             or streetcar service, or being within a half (1/2) mile of fixed transit stop
             Non-Urban Areas: There is access to transit options at the site (van service/dial a ride,
             carshare/carpool, bike or scooter availability, etc.)


        5.   Project includes either a co-located (on the site of the property) Early Care and Education
             (ECE) facility, an ECE facility is within a half (1/2) mile of the property, or there is a plan for
             in-home options to be available to families (please elaborate).




                                                                                                                   OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                                   COMMUNITY SERVICES
        6.   Project is in the catchment area of a high performing public elementary school; GreatSchools
             rating of 7 or above (hitos://www.greatschools.org/oregon/) — to find enter address in
             search bar on top of screen and select Elementary from the dropdown menu to the left of
             the search bar. Use the Assigned School.


Anti-Displacement Index
        1.   Meet criteria for at least 2 of the 5 categories in the OHCS Anti-Displacement Index:
                 a.   Income Profile
                 b.   Vulnerable People
                 c.   Precarious Housing
                 d.   Housing Market Activity
                 e.   Neighborhood Demographic Change

Instructions for submittal:

    e   Respond to the questions in the application.
    e   Upload a vicinity map as instructed in the Site Review Checklist indicating selected criteria to
        your Procorem WorkCenter.
    e   Upload supporting documentation to your Procorem WorkCenter, if applicable.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e   Project location meets the minimum      requirement of two of the of the Opportunity Area criteria
        or is located in a Census Tract with two or more risk factors identified from the OHCS Anti-
        Displacement Index.




Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH) standards
Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH) is a set of best practices and proven strategies to successfully
house people experiencing chronic homelessness. Members of these households often have complex
needs, including mental illness, substance use, and chronic physical difficulties, alongside their
experience of long-term homelessness. PSH services must be designed to effectively support
communities’ most vulnerable populations in reaching long-term housing success. PSH is a crucial
resource for people who, without support in their tenancy, may not be successful in maintaining stable
housing and who, without housing, may not be as successful in utilizing services to achieve and maintain
recovery, health, and wellness.

Project-based PSH combines three elements: permanently affordable housing, comprehensive tenancy
support services, and project-based rental assistance. PSH must be affordable to households with
extremely low incomes and provide wraparound services.

Any project identified as Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH) must meet the OHCS standards for PSH
projects, even if a project is not seeking/receiving PSH-specific funds. To be eligible for PSH Program
funding, the sponsor must have completed an Oregon Supportive Housing Institute within the last four




                                                                                                           OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                           COMMUNITY SERVICES
years. Projects that went through the Institute will be prioritized for PSH Program funding. Eligibility for
PSH Program funding can be extended past four years if all the sponsor's current projects with PSH
Program resources have a recent program monitoring score of 150 or above. Sponsors with more than
one monitoring score within the last two year will be reviewed on their lowest score.

For questions about the PSH Program or PSH standards, please email HCS.PSH@hcs.oregon.gov.

Instructions for submittal:

    e    Respond to the questions in the application.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e    Responses to the questions meet the rubric in Attachment B of the Impact Assessment application.
    e    Applicant ensures that the project meets OHCS’ PSH standards in collaboration with OHCS’ PSH
         Program Manager.




Permit strategy
The permitting process differs from one jurisdiction to another and has important implications for a
project’s readiness to proceed. At this step, OHCS requires applicants to submit a narrative describing
their anticipated timeline and strategy for receiving permits, including early communication with the
permitting jurisdiction about the project. Projects do not need to have their permits at Impact
Assessment, but should have an anticipated timeline, strategy, and communication with the permitting
jurisdiction. Submission of permits would be a benefit, but it is acceptable to not have them yet if there
is a plan in place.

This standard is not applicable for LIFT Acquisition applications.

Instructions for submittal:

    e    Respond to the narrative questions in the application.
    e    Upload the Building Permit Timeline Disclosure to your Procorem WorkCenter.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e    Applicant provides sufficient explanation of the project’s permitting timeline, and the timeline
         aligns with OHCS’ readiness standards.




Prequalification
OHCS prequalifies sponsors, developers, and development consultants to expedite the funding process
by ensuring performance, experience, and good standing of applicants and partners.

Organizations submit their Prequalification Request Form through OHCS’ website each year.
Prequalification will be updated on an annual basis. Applicants must be prequalified by OHCS before
moving past the Impact Assessment step. While prequalification ensures organizations are eligible to
apply, it does not guarantee project funding.




                                                                                                            OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                            COMMUNITY SERVICES
Prequalification reviews the following elements:

    e   Portfolio performance:     Information on project challenges and issues will be gathered to
        understand how OHCS can better support developers and their projects. Problems with existing
        properties in OHCS’s portfolio of properties need to be addressed before the applicant can be
        prequalified.
    e   Developer experience: Development experience is assessed by evaluating the number of
        projects an entity has successfully developed in Oregon with public funding. This includes
        evaluating any fundamental organizational changes in key leadership or other critical
        development positions.
    e   Legal good standing: The OHCS Integrity Certification form is used to evaluate legal good
        standing. This document asks questions about moral turpitude, financial standing, and
        debarment.



Responses to the prequalification form may lead OHCS to require applicants to include assistance from
either another prequalified developer or development consultant to be eligible to apply. Respondents
are notified if their approval is tied to these conditions.

Instructions for submittal:

    e   Submit your Prequalification Request Form.
    e   Upload the OHCS Integrity Certification to your online Prequalification Request Form submission.
    e   Upload the certification form for CSOs (if applicable) to your online Prequalification Request
        Form submission.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e   Developers are in the prequalified registry, meeting standards for portfolio performance,
        developer experience, and legal good standing.
    e   If developer is not prequalified due to not meeting standards for portfolio performance, they
        must address the issues in their existing properties before they can submit for another project.
    e   If developer is not prequalified due to not meeting standards for developer experience, they
        must work with a prequalified developer or development consultant.
    e   If developer or development consultant is not prequalified due to not meeting standards for
        legal good standing, they must have a waiver approved by the OHCS Assistant Director of
        Transactions.
    e   If developer is a CSO, they must submit a certification form that indicates they qualify as CSOs
        under OHCS’ definition. A link to the form can be found on OHCS’s website and in the
        Prequalification Request Form.




Resident services
Applicants describe how they will address the needs of the proposed tenant populations, services
offered, uses for funding, referral agencies, partnership structure, and other elements. Applicants




                                                                                                           OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                           COMMUNITY SERVICES
seeking PSH-specific OHCS funding (development capital, rental assistance, and/or services funding) will
answer additional questions about how they serve PSH residents.

Instructions for submittal:

    e     Respond to the questions in the application.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e     Responses to questions meet the rubric in Attachment A of the Impact Assessment application.



Risk of loss (preservation only)
OHCS will prioritize applications according to transparent and predictable criteria, using tiebreakers if
needed.    Due to the anticipation of oversubscription for preservation projects, these applications will be
ranked rather than evaluated on a first-come, first-reviewed basis.


For properties with federal project-based rent assistance at imminent risk of loss: OHCS is building a
managed queue, with three priority levels defined in the Preservation Funding Framework.



This standard is not applicable for LIFT Acquisition applications.


Instructions for submittal:

    e     Respond to the questions in the application.
    e     Upload supporting documentation to Procorem WorkCenter, if applicable, including Evidence of
          Project-Based Rental Assistance (PBRA).

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e     Project must meet “risk of loss” definition and be eligible for priority funding based on the
          above.



Site control
The applicant must have control of the land necessary for the project when they submit the Impact
Assessment application as evidenced by one of the following:
    e     Arecorded deed or conveyance showing the applicant is the owner of the site,
    e     Avvalid purchase and sale agreement,
    e     Avvalid option to purchase,
    e     Avvalid option for a long-term lease, or
    e     Other evidence satisfactory to OHCS.

The name of the entity on the evidence of site control must be the same as the applicant’s name on the
Impact Assessment application. The site control document should also identify the same
address/location as the project site listed in the application. If the site description in the application and




                                                                                                             OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                             COMMUNITY SERVICES
the site control document are not the same, the applicant must provide a narrative description and
supporting documentation to clarify the method used to establish the area and cost for the project. The
duration of the purchase option should align with the proposed financial closing date and include some
ability to extend the purchase option should any unforeseen delay occur. There is no prioritization of
projects that are at risk of losing site control. Project are intended to have met all evaluation standards,
including having site control, and be ready to financially close by their determined date.


OHCS only accepts one application for a specific site or for any part of the same site, regardless of
whether applications are submitted by the same applicant or by multiple applicants. If more than one
application is received for the same site or any part of the same site, OHCS may disqualify one or all of
the applications.

Instructions for submittal:

    e    Respond to the question in the application.
    e    Upload the Site Control Evidence Form to your Procorem WorkCenter.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e    Applicant has submitted a correctly competed Site Control Evidence Form and provided
         documentation to prove site control.



Zoning in place
The project must be properly zoned or have the ability to get the proper zoning for the intended use. The
applicant must submit the Zoning Form, provided by OHCS, executed by the appropriate zoning
authority.

This standard is not applicable for LIFT Acquisition applications.

Instructions for submittal:

    e    Upload the Zoning Form to your Procorem WorkCenter.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e    Applicant has submitted a completed and executed Zoning Form that indicates the zoning is
         adequate for the intended use or can be adequate with additional land use approvals. This
         standard can be met by checking the first or second box of question 4 on the Zoning Form.




Supplemental documents for Impact Assessment
Supplemental documents are required at each application step. A list of these documents can be found
in your WorkCenter.




                                                                                                            OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                            COMMUNITY SERVICES
                                Step 2: Financial Eligibility


About the Financial Eligibility step
The Financial Eligibility step focuses on the financial aspects of the project, requiring applicants to
submit lender letters of intent from financial partners, well-developed construction cost estimates, and a
full proforma.

OHCS evaluates adherence to the project design and policy priorities proposed in the Impact Assessment
step. This step results in an update to the Letter of Intent given at Impact Assessment, conditionally
committing resources for projects.

The Financial Eligibility step typically occurs about one year before closing. OHCS evaluates the project’s
financial proforma for adherence to underwriting standards, project costs, and construction standards.

Adhering to proposed timelines and plans is critical. A significant deviation from the proposed timeline,
project design, or policy priorities described in the Impact Assessment step will result in the loss of the
Letter of Intent for resources, requiring the project to return to the Impact Assessment step.



Financial Eligibility evaluation standards
The following evaluation standards are required to be met at the Financial Eligibility step.

Applicants are required to meet all evaluation standards to indicate to OHCS that they are ready to move
to the next step.   While applicants may move at different speeds, OHCS encourages consistent progress
and ongoing communication with their assigned Production Analyst to ensure timely review and
feedback throughout the process.

Projects may move quickly through the Financial Eligibility review, with    a maximum time of 6 months or
9 months for projects with HUD or USDA Rural Development funding, projects submitted by CSOs, or
projects in rural areas submitted by a nonprofit after Housing Stability Council approval. Any impacts to
project timelines should be actively presented and discussed with the assigned OHCS Production Analyst,
so that needed timeline adjustments can be reviewed and approved for reasonableness by the
Production Manager.

The expectation is that in the first three months all available documents are provided to the assigned
WorkCenter for evaluation and discussion with the OHCS Production Analyst. Failure to meet evaluation
standards will remove a project from the Financial Eligibility step and require the applicant to restart at a
previous application step. In addition, a period of 90 days of inactivity or failure to make progress during
the Financial Eligibility step may result in return of the application to a prior ORCA step. OHCS considers
inactivity or failure to make progress to include not responding to OHCS within the allowable timeframe.




                                                                                                              OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                              COMMUNITY SERVICES
Once a project reaches the Financial Eligibility step, OHCS assigns a Production Analyst to work
collaboratively with the applicant through the process. Applicants are encouraged to upload documents
and check Financial Eligibility tasks off to signal they are ready to collaborate on that task with their
Production Analyst. Delaying submissions until the final days of the window may leave insufficient time
for review, placing the project at risk of removal.

Applicants will receive instructions on how to keep their project moving through the Financial Eligibility
stage, including:

Initial Conference Calls: Applicant must schedule a conference call with a Production Analyst within 5
business days of the date of the OHCS LOI.

Business Partner Calls: Applicant must schedule the first business partner call (Including OHCS
Production Analyst) within 30 business days of the date of the OHCS LOI. Business Partner Calls are to
include all identified business partners (i.e. OHCS, consultant, lenders, and investor (if applicable). The
inclusion of the Production Analyst is a requirement.

Conference Calls: Applicant must schedule a conference call with a Production Analyst within 5 business
days of executing the OHCS LOI.

OHCS requires that for all transactions, the applicant must demonstrate progress on completing the
Project’s Financial Eligibility step within 30 days of receiving an OHCS LOI to continue in the review and
processing of an application. Failure to meet this requirement could result in a project being considered
inactive. OHCS reserves the right to remove a project from the application process and require it to
restart at Intake if no demonstration of progress has been attempted by the applicant within 30 days of
receiving an OHCS LOI.

In addition, applicants must submit all other required supplemental documents not associated with the
listed evaluation standards below, but necessary to complete this application step. See the list in your
Procorem WorkCenter for details.




Architectural plans
New construction
A concept-level plan including floor plans and elevations is required. The application includes a narrative
question about any updates to the project description made since the Impact Assessment step.

Instructions for submittal:

    e    Respond to the questions in the application.
    e    Review CDM Supplemental in the Core Development folder.
    e    Submit schematic design drawings (architectural plans including site design, exterior elevation
         and floor plans) according to the CDM Chapter 4.1, Section 4.1.02-1, 1) a.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e    Plans are aligned with proposed costs, subsidy limits, and other requirements.




                                                                                                              OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                              COMMUNITY SERVICES
Rehabilitation/Preservation
Concept-level drawings that show major elements of the project and the final written scope of work
describing all the major rehabilitation elements are required. The application includes a narrative
question about any updates to the project description made since the Impact Assessment step.
The OHCS architect reviews drawings and costs to evaluate alignment.
Instructions for submittal:

    e   Respond to the questions in the application.
    e   Review the CDM Supplement in the Core Development folder.
    e   Submit schematic design drawings according to the CDM        Chapter 4.1, Section 4.1.02-(1)(a).

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e   Plans are aligned with proposed costs, subsidy limits, and other requirements.




Construction costs
Applicants must describe how construction costs have changed from the Impact Assessment step. OHCS
compares costs to inflated historic and current data from our existing portfolio and identifies project
costs that fall outside of expected ranges using a Predictive Cost Model. If a project’s cost turns out to
be more than 25% or higher than the model is projecting, the applicant needs to substantiate any
project costs that are outside of that variance. If necessary to substantiate project costs, OHCS may
request a third-party cost justification. OHCS’ evaluation of costs includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
     e   Assessing cost reasonability with a predictive cost model informed by available data and
        comparable projects.
    e   Requiring detailed cost estimates and tracking of project costs with detailed line items in the
        financial proforma, using the Uniformat Schedule of Values (SOV).
    e   Requiring submission of a cost analysis that provides potential strategies for reducing project
        costs.

Instructions for submittal:

    e   Respond to the narrative questions in the application.
    e   Upload an updated copy of the estimator’s other official construction cost estimate (if present)
        that is being used to communicate costs with the project owner or other project stakeholders.
    e   Upload the Cost Justification Form to your Procorem WorkCenter.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e   Applicant has completely responded to questions in the application.
    e   Project costs meet the predictive costs model assessment or receive a waiver after consultation
        with OHCS staff.
    e   Applicant has submitted a cost analysis, if required.




                                                                                                             OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                             COMMUNITY SERVICES
Equity in contracting strategy
OHCS allows up to $60,000 in additional subsidy for contracting equity consultants. Contracting equity
consultants may provide various services including, but not limited to, supporting outreach to
subcontractors, reviewing proposed subcontractors to see if they are COBID-certified or eligible,
coordinating or managing relationships with chosen subcontractors, administration and reporting for
contracting equity requirements, and other strategies for equitable contracting. Project teams can work
with any consultant they choose that provides these services.


Project teams choosing to work with a contracting equity consultant will provide a signed contract during
the Financial Eligibility step outlining these services.

Instructions for submittal:

If the applicant chooses to work with a contracting equity consultant and the project is eligible for
additional subsidy, please do the following:

    e    Upload a signed contract outlining the services to be provided and the dollar amount to be spent
        to your Procorem WorkCenter.
    e    Note the amount of funding requested for your contracting equity consultant in your Financial
         Eligibility Proforma in the Budget Uses tab under Contracting Equity Consultant.

Requirement to meet this standard:

If the applicant chooses to work with a contracting equity consultant, the applicant has provided
documentation as described above.




Financial proforma for Financial Eligibility step
Applicants receive a Financial Eligibility proforma in their Procorem WorkCenter that is prepopulated
with information submitted in the Impact Assessment step.

The Financial Eligibility proforma requires applicants to have a completed budget with costs based ona
bid from a general contractor, the schedule of values, the full budget sources, and budget uses
worksheets that must be completed. These numbers are evaluated against OHCS’ predictive cost model,
subsidy limits, construction costs review, and Cost Justification Form.

Applicants must note updates to any other project information, including project details, rents and
incomes, or other key project characteristics.

Preservation projects must provide current and post-rehab proformas showing rents and incomes. For
projects seeking PSH Services funding, the PSH Services Budget in the proforma application must be
completed.

The information in this version of the proforma is included in the conditional commitment from OHCS,
and significant deviation from the information provided will lead to a project’s removal from this step of
the application. Applicants must then restart step with more accurate numbers that align with the new
scope and scale of the project. See more under “Policy changes from Impact Assessment.”




                                                                                                         OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                         COMMUNITY SERVICES
Instructions for submittal:

    e    Upload the ARH ORCA Financial Proforma — Financial Eligibility to your Procorem WorkCenter.
    e    Upload an updated copy of the estimator’s official cost estimate format (if present) used to
        communicate costs with the project owner or other stakeholders.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e   Applicant submits proforma with full project details, development schedule, development team,
         budget sources, construction cost SOV, budget uses, rents and incomes, and any specific
         program worksheets associated with resources your project has been assigned.


    e    Proforma meets OHCS underwriting criteria on debt coverage ratio (DCR), contingencies,
        development cost percentage, profit, overhead, and general conditions, developer fee,
         replacement reserves, and cashflow, including but not limited to:
             o     Proforma includes realistic and available resources on the sources of funding.
             ©     Sources and uses balance; there are no gaps in funding and all other funding is
                   committed.
             o     Sources listed as “fundraising” and “capital campaigns” will result in automatic failure.
                   Resources already obtained through these efforts are allowable and should be presented
                   as “cash.”
             o     Budget sources and budget uses worksheets are complete and provided in the correct
                   locations in the proforma.
             Oo    Ina mixed-use project, no commercial income is used to support the low-income
                   residential units.



Lender and investor letters of interest (LOI)
LOIs must be received from all funders, as well as evidence of submittal of the HUD project-based
voucher (PBV) application if PBVs are being used in the project. LOIs must also be submitted from any
services funder.

Instructions for submittal:

    e   Upload LOlIs for each investor or financial partner to your Procorem WorkCenter, including, if
        applicable, an executed letter of interest from OHCS Bond Counsel, a letter of interest from a
        qualified lender (if applying for OAHTC), and letters of interest from other lenders or investors.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e   Letters of interest or other formal commitment of funding documentation submitted from all
        funders that are listed in the proforma.



Leveraged resources
Projects must provide OHCS with information about efforts made to leverage state investments with
other private or public funds. Where sufficient detail is not provided to justify the percentage of state




                                                                                                               OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                               COMMUNITY SERVICES
subsidy in the project, the Production Analyst will require applicants to provide documentation in
addition to the narrative:

Instructions for submittal:

    e   Upload to your Procorem WorkCenter narrative overview of leverage and where applicable,
        evidence of leveraged resources or unsuccessful attempts to secure them with explanations
        regarding efforts made.
    e   If no efforts have been made, provide other rationale for why the project cannot include
        leveraged resources, if applicable.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e   Applicant has provided above documentation.



Permit submission
At this step, OHCS requires applicants to either confirm they have already applied for their permits or
submit a plan for doing so that includes a signed letter from the permitting jurisdiction confirming they
are aware that the project will receive permitting with proper zoning in the near future.

This standard is not applicable for LIFT Acquisition applications.

Instructions for submittal:

    e   Upload evidence of permit application or a signed letter from the permitting jurisdiction to your
        Procorem WorkCenter.

Requirement to meet this standard:

Applicant has provided one of the following:

    e   Proof that permits have been submitted, or
    e   <Asigned letter from the permitting jurisdiction confirming they are aware that the project needs
        permitting with proper zoning in the near future.




Policy changes from Impact Assessment
Applicants are required to provide updates on any policy changes that have occurred since the Impact
Assessment step. When a project receives an LOI, they will be subject to the version of the ORCA Manual
that was active 30 days prior to Housing Stability Council approval. This will govern the applicable
policies under which the project will proceed. OHCS reserves the right to make updates or adjustments
to application requirements, including the applicable version of the ORCA Manual, provided that they do
not compromise the feasibility of the project.

Applicants will not be expected to make any changes to the project that deviate from the policy priorities
proposed and approved in the Impact Assessment step, including adherence to project design and costs.
However, applicants must incorporate any non-material changes required by OHCS.




                                                                                                          OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                          COMMUNITY SERVICES
If a required update would significantly hinder project feasibility, applicants may submit documentation
requesting an exception. OHCS will review such requests and determine whether to approve or deny the
update requirement based on specific circumstances and demonstrated inability to proceed.

Deviation from submitted information that constitutes a material change may result in a project being
removed from this application step. A material change means a change in or relating to the business,
operations, or use of capital provided by OHCS that, taken as a whole, would reasonably be expected to
have a significant effect on the project budget, housing type and population served. According to the
General Policy and Guideline Manual (GPGM), a material change includes, but is not limited to,       a change
in:

      e    The number of buildings or units
      e    The project contact person
      e    The Identity of Interest disclosure
      e    The development team
      e    The project’s total project costs
      e   A financing source (whether debt or equity)
      e    Operating revenue or expenses for the project of more than ten percent
      e   = Anything that would result in a change in the standards OHCS uses to evaluate projects

Other examples of changes OHCS may determine to be material include:

      e    Expanding the scope of the project, such as adding or subtracting buildings, units, and design
           elements that impact the budget and livability of tenants
      e    Changing project type and switching to a different intended tenant population
      e    Replacing sponsor and project ownership in a way that has a financial impact on the project
      e    Showing a gap, after funding approval and prior to closing and construction start, of more than
           10 percent of OHCS investment (exclusive of tax credits)



Instructions for submittal:

      e    Respond to the questions in the application.
      e    Upload supplemental documents to Procorem WorkCenter (where applicable).

Requirement to meet this standard:

      e    OHCS evaluates deviations from initially proposed policy and financial evaluation standards on
           case-by-case basis. OHCS determines if policy changes warrant a re-evaluation of the project,
           which require a project to return to the Impact Assessment step.




Underwriting guidelines
OHCS applies underwriting guidelines to ensure ongoing project viability and risk mitigation associated
with all applicable programs. Guidelines are consistent with industry-standard minimum requirements of
mortgage lenders, investors, and other potential public funding sources. More details can be found in
the General Policy and Guideline Manual (GPGM).




                                                                                                             OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                             COMMUNITY SERVICES
Instructions for submittal:

    e    This standard is evaluated through the financial proforma for Financial Eligibility.

Requirement to meet this standard:

The proforma must demonstrate the following:

    e    Minimum debt service coverage ratio of 1.15 to 1.30 (depending on funding) on all “must-pay”
         primary debt.
             o       Ifa project does not have any permanent debt, the project meets a 30-year positive cash
                  flow requirement.
    e    The project maintains a positive cash flow through the 30-year proforma period, unless paired
         with 4% LIHTC. If paired with 4% LIHTC, positive cash flow through a minimum of 20 years is
         required.
    e    5-7% vacancy rate (explain if below 7%).
    e    2% escalation of rents and 3% escalation of expenses.
    e    Capitalized operating reserve of a minimum of 3 months and maximum of 12 months of
         operating expenses and debt service.
    e    Replacement reserves of $450 per unit.
    e    Deferred developer fee demonstrates the ability for repayment by year 15, regardless
         of the intent of applying for LIHTC/PAB.
    e    Operating expenses are between $5,500 and $8,500 per unit per annum (PUPA), excluding
         property taxes and resident services expenses. Programs may require a higher limit (depending
         on project location or funding source). Operating costs must be supported by an appraisal.
         Operating expenses for PSH units must be no lower than $8,000 per unit per annum (PUPA).
    e    Demonstration of meeting BOLI compliance, if applicable.
    e   = |f other public capital or operating subsidies are used in financing the project, relevant
         requirements of those subsidy sources will also apply.
    e    The maximum       construction contingency is 10% for rehabilitation projects and 5% for new
         construction projects. The percentages apply to hard costs, site work, and contractor profit and
         overhead. The contingency maximum          is evaluated using all construction contingencies
         combined, i.e., owner, contractor, other.




Supplemental documents for Financial Eligibility
Supplemental documents are required at each application step. A list of these documents can be found
in your WorkCenter.




                                                                                                         OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                         COMMUNITY SERVICES
                                      Step 3: Commitment

About the Commitment step
The Commitment step requires applicants to submit final architectural plans, a final proforma, final cost
estimates, permit approval, and secured investor commitments. The Commitment step should be
initiated no more than 9 months before closing. This step evaluates the financial aspects of the project,
including adherence to underwriting standards and budget review. After a project receives its amended
Letter of Intent from the Financial Eligibility step approval, they will be expected to submit the required
materials for this step within 3 months.

Approval of these materials locks in an award Reservation Letter, which commits funding to a project
and requires projects to be ready to proceed towards a closing date within 6 months and to start
construction soon after.

Adherence to proposed timelines and plans is crucial. A significant deviation from the proposed timeline,
project design, or policy priorities described in the Impact Assessment step or a significant deviation
from costs proposed in the Financial Eligibility step will result in the loss of the Reservation Letter,
requiring the project to return to the Financial Eligibility step.

Additionally, failure to reach financial close within 6 months will void the funding reservation acquired at
the approval of the Commitment step and cause the project to return to the Impact Assessment step.




Commitment            evaluation standards

The following evaluation standards are required to be met at the Commitment step.

Applicants are required to meet all evaluation standards to indicate to OHCS that they are ready to close
out the application process. In addition, applicants must submit all other required supplemental
documents not associated with these evaluation standards but necessary to complete this application
step. Failure to meet evaluation standards for a period of 3 months will remove a project from the
application process and require them to restart at a previous application step.

See the task list in your Procorem WorkCenter for details.




Architectural plans
At this step, applicants must submit drawings and specifications identical to the package being submitted
to the local permitting authority. The OHCS architect reviews drawings and costs to evaluate alignment.

New construction

Instructions for submittal:

    e   Respond to the narrative questions in the application.
    e   Review the CDM Supplemental in the OHCS Document Library folder of your WorkCenter.




                                                                                                           OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                           COMMUNITY SERVICES
    e   Upload 95+% complete drawings and project manual (architectural plans with drawings and
        specifications submitted to the local code authority) according to the CDM       Chapter 4.1, Section
        4.1.02-4, 1) a) and b) to your Procorem WorkCenter.
    e   Upload the CDM DSO-Chapter 6.1 and CDM DSO-Chapter 6.2 to your Procorem WorkCenter.
    e   Submit the current draft of construction contract according to the CDM Chapter 4.1, Section
        4.1.02-4, 1), d).
    e   Submit the CDM A-GC2 Sustainability Part 2 form according to the CDM Chapters 7.0 and 7.1.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e   Proposed plans and costs align.

Rehabilitation/preservation

Instructions for submittal:

    e   Respond to the narrative questions in the application.
    e   Review CDM Supplemental in Core Development folder.
    e   Upload 95+% complete drawings and project manual (architectural plans with drawings and
        specifications submitted to the local code authority) according to the CDM       Chapter 4.1, Section
        4.1.02-4, 1) a) and b) to your Procorem WorkCenter.
    e   Submit Completed Development Standards Overlay (DSO) Checklist - Chapters 6.0 and 6.1
    e   Submit Current Draft of Construction Contract - Chapter 4.1, Section 4.1.02-4, 1), d)
    e   Submit SDS Certification Part 2 according to the CDM Chapters 7.0 and 7.1.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e   Proposed plans and costs align.




HUD HOME/HTF subsidy layering
In adherence with HUD regulations, OHCS evaluates HOME/HTF           projects to ensure their financial
viability and contribution of quality affordable housing. Our review process is designed to determine if
the project offers a reasonable level of profit or return on the owner's or developer's investment and if
the HOME/HTF    investment, whether alone or in conjunction with other governmental assistance, is the
minimum necessary to maintain affordability for the required period.

Upon completion of the subsidy layering review, OHCS may recommend           adjustments, such as reductions
in HOME/HTE    assistance, rent adjustments, or operating expense modifications, to ensure compliance
with program requirements and the sustainable provision of affordable housing.

This standard is not applicable for LIFT Acquisition applications.

Instructions for submittal:

    e   Upload HUD HOME/HTF subsidy layering documents to your Procorem WorkCenter, if
        applicable.

Requirement to meet this standard:




                                                                                                            OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                            COMMUNITY SERVICES
    e   Submit subsidy layering documents.
    e   Submit HOME/HTF units’ calculations.



Financial closing date commitment
Applicants upload a letter that commits to a financial closing date within six months of funding award
(Reservation Letter).

Instructions for submittal:

    e   Upload the Financial Closing Date Commitment Letter to your Procorem WorkCenter.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e   Closing date is within six months of funding award.


Financial proforma for commitment step
This is your project’s final budget and form. The proforma, including sources and uses in this budget, are
considered final. The architectural plans must be final and identical to those submitted to the local code
authority. A preliminary title report must be submitted as well.

A project at this point, if approved, is considered ready to proceed and will receive a Reservation Letter
with the condition that the project will achieve closing in six months, or its resource commitment will be
rescinded. There will be no further adjustments to the budget, design, or anything else that has been
submitted to OHCS. If any changes are necessary at this step, the project must restart the ORCA process
with information that is accurate.

Instructions for submittal:

    e   Upload the ARH ORCA Financial Proforma — Commitment to your Procorem WorkCenter.

Requirement to meet this standard:

    e   Project is ready to proceed to closing, with resource commitment conditional on their ability to
        achieve it within six months.
    e   Financial information must meet all standards within the General Policy and Guideline Manual
        (GPGM).



Supplemental documents for Commitment
Supplemental documents are required at each ORCA application step. A list of these documents can be
found in your WorkCenter.




                                                                                                         OREGON   HOUSING
                                                                                                         COMMUNITY   SERVICES
Definitions

The terms defined in this ORCA (including those provided in this subsection), as well as terms defined in
other existing Program documents, will have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:

Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing (AFFH): A provision of the 1968 federal Fair Housing Act that
legally requires that all federal departments and agencies, as well as grantees of federal funding, must
administer their programs and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner that
affirmatively furthers the purposes of the Fair Housing Act.! Since the Fair Housing Act has two primary
purposes — to prevent discrimination in the sale, rental, and financing of housing based on race, color,
national origin, religion, sex, familial status, and disability and to reverse housing segregation —
affirmatively furthering fair housing is fulfilling the dual purpose of the law. Specifically, as enforced by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), affirmatively furthering fair housing
means taking meaningful actions that, taken together, address significant disparities in housing needs
and in access to opportunity based on protected characteristics, by replacing segregated living patterns
with truly integrated and balanced living patterns by transforming racially and ethnically concentrated
areas of poverty into areas of opportunity, and by fostering and maintaining compliance with civil rights
and fair housing laws.

Agreement Documents: The funding documents, the final form of which are satisfactory
to OHCS, in consultation with the Oregon Department of Justice and executed in connection
with the project.


Communities of Color: Identity-based communities that hold a primary racial identity that describes
shared racial characteristics among community members. The term aims to define a characteristic of the
community that its members share (such as being African American) that supports self-definition by
community members, and that typically denotes a shared history and current/historic experiences of
racism. An older term for Communities of Color is that of "minority communities" which is increasingly
inaccurate given that people of color are majority identities on a global level. That term has also been
rejected for its potential to infer any inferior characteristics. The community may or may not also be a
geographic community. Given that race is a socially defined construct, the definitions of these
communities are dynamic and evolve across time. The Coalition of Communities of Color defines
Communities of Color to include Native Americans, Latinos, Asian and Pacific Islanders (further
disaggregated according to local preferences), African Americans, African Immigrants and Refugees,
Middle Eastern, and Slavic communities.

Culturally Responsive Organization (CRO): means an entity that, as determined by the Housing and
Community Services Department:
    (a) Comprehensively addresses power relationships throughout the organization by methods that
include addressing conflicts and dynamics of inclusion and exclusion;
    (b) Has relationships with and is responsive to communities that the organization serves, including
communities of color;


1 For further information, see Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, 42 U.S.C. 3608, and Executive Order 12892




                                                                                                                       OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                                       COMMUNITY SERVICES
    (c) Hires, promotes, trains and supports staff who are culturally and linguistically diverse in ways that
reflect the communities that the organization serves, including communities of color;
   (d) Provides culturally responsive service; and
   (e) With respect to paragraphs (a) to (d) of this subsection, has adopted governance structures,
policies and cultural norms to hold its leadership and staff accountable and to continue improvements.

Culturally Responsive Services: means service that:
(a)ls adapted to maximize the respect of and relevance to the beliefs, practices, culture and linguistic
needs of the diverse client populations and communities being served, including clients and
communities of color.
(b)Has the capacity to respond to the issues of diverse communities.
(c)experiences, frames of reference, values, norms and performance styles of clients and communities to
make services and programs more welcoming, accessible, appropriate and effective for all eligible and
intended recipients.

Culturally Specific Organization (CSO): An entity that provides services to a cultural community and the
entity has the following characteristics:
    e    Majority of members and/or clients must be from a particular cultural community that has faced
         housing discrimination.
    e    Organizational environment is culturally focused, and the cultural community being served
         recognizes it as a culturally-specific entity that provides culturally and linguistically responsive
         services.
    e    Majority of staff must be from the cultural community being served, and the majority of the
         leadership (defined to collectively include board members and management           positions) must be
         from the cultural community being served.
    e    The entity has a track record of successful community engagement and involvement with the
         cultural community being served, rooted on a foundation of respect and trust; and
    e    The organization engages in advocacy for housing and/or economic justice for the cultural
         community with their guidance.

Metro: Census tracts within the Portland Tri-County area (Clackamas, Multnomah, Washington
counties).

Non-Metro Urban: Census tracts with more than 480 housing units per square mile within             a Metro
County as defined by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), not in the Portland Tri-County
area.

Procorem WorkCenter: A secure portal technology solution by ProLink Solutions™ and used by OHCS to
help facilitate collaboration and communication models for all applicants and future housing partners.
The Procorem WorkCenter includes a repository for electronic document submission, a task
management and tracking tool, an events calendar, and communication features.

Rural: Census tracts with less than 64 housing units per square mile, not in a large central metro county
as defined by NCHS.

Service to Communities of Color: Service to Communities of Color can be achieved in several ways and
should be relevant to the community in which the project is located, and the target population
anticipated to be served. Any approach that is chosen must include intentional engagement with




                                                                                                                OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                                COMMUNITY SERVICES
Communities of Color for services planning for the development. In general, OHCS would expect that
addressing this intentional engagement should be accomplished in one or more of the following ways:
    e   Development, sponsorship or management        by a Culturally Specific Organization or a
    e   Culturally Responsive Organization with a diverse and representative leadership
    e   Anongoing service partnership with a Culturally Specific Organization or a Culturally
        Responsive Organization
    e   Plan for the provision of Culturally Responsive Services for tenants
    e   Relevant marketing and outreach plan designed to publicize to Communities of Color the
        availability of the new housing opportunities created by the project consistent with the
    e   Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plan
    e   Project explicitly designed and located to address displacement of Communities of Color
    e   Other services that uplift Communities of Color as approved by OHCS staff.

Suburban or Small City: Census tracts with more than 64, less than 480 housing units per square mile,
not in a large central Metro County OR an Urban Tract in a Micropolitan/Rural County as defined by
NCHS.

Tribe or Tribal: A federally recognized Native American Tribe or Indian Tribe in Oregon, as
defined in ORS 182.162 or related to the same.


Tribal-led Project: A project that is sponsored by a Tribe, a Tribally Designated Housing Entity,
or an organization owned by a Tribe.




                                                                                                        OREGON   HOUSING       w
                                                                                                        COMMUNITY   SERVICES
General Terms and Conditions
1.1 Any funding allocation under this ORCA is subject to receipt by OHCS of the proceeds of the
anticipated Article XI-Q Bonds issuance, if applicable, and approval by bond counsel, the Oregon
Department of Justice, and the Issuer (State Treasurer collectively with the Department of
Administrative Services (DAS) and OHCS or OHCS only) to use the proceeds for purposes as
contemplated under the ORCA.

1.2 OHCS may require additional information to determine whether or not an application satisfies
relevant criteria. Any necessary clarifications or modifications normally will be made before
OHCS makes any reservation and may become         part of the Agreement Documents.

1.3 Submission of an application by applicant or acceptance by OHCS of a submitted application
neither constitutes an agreement of any kind between OHCS and applicant nor does it secure
or imply that applicant will be selected for receipt of a reservation of funds.

1.4 In the extent that other funding sources have additional or other requirements, the most
restrictive requirements will apply to the Project.

1.5 All costs associated with applicant's submission of an application are the sole responsibility of
the applicant and shall not be borne to any degree by the State of Oregon.

1.6 Successful applicants will be required to maintain appropriate levels of insurance and to comply
with the OHCS project requirements and other policies, including execution of the Agreement
Documents.

1.7 OHCS may amend any Reservation Letter and other related documents that result from a
reservation made pursuant to this ORCA. All such amendments will be in writing and must be
signed by relevant authorized parties. Applicants may only apply for funding of one (1) phase of
a multi-phase Project under this ORCA.


1.8 OHCS assesses an application charge. A check for the application charge is required at
application submission and must be received by the application standards completion date.


1.9 ORS 60.701 requires foreign corporations be registered by the State of Oregon, Office of the
Secretary of State, before conducting business in the state. A foreign corporation (ORS 60.001)
means a for-profit corporation incorporated under a law other than the law of the State of
Oregon. If a foreign corporation is selected for an Agreement resulting from this ORCA, it must register
to do business in Oregon.

1.10 OHCS reserves the right:
    A. to amend this ORCA;
    B.   to amend any deadlines associated with the ORCA process;
    C.   to determine whether an application does or does not substantially comply with the
         requirements of this ORCA;
    D.   to waive any minor irregularity, informality, or nonconformance with the requirements of this
         ORCA;




                                                                                                         OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                         COMMUNITY SERVICES
    E.    to obtain from and/or provide to other public agencies, upon request, references, regarding the
          applicant's performance;
    F.    at anytime prior to execution of Agreement Documents (including after announcement of the
          apparent reservation) to reject any application that fails to comply with the requirements of this
          ORCA;
    G.    to reject all applications received and cancel this ORCA upon a finding by OHCS that such
          cancellation would be in the best interest of the State;
    H.    to use adherence with components of the applicant's application and this ORCA as criteria in
          future multifamily funding solicitations;
    |.    to withdraw any funding source from this ORCA; and/or
    J.    to waive any term or condition of this ORCA for good cause as determined by OHCS.
     K.   to reject any application from an organization that has previously failed to comply with
          affordability requirement
    L.    to reject an application from an organization with members who have been involved in an
          organization that failed to comply with affordability requirements.

1.11
OHCS Reservation of Discretionary Authority:


OHCS reserves the right to reject applications or deny project requests seeking OHCS funding, in its sole
discretion, in which the applicant, owner, principal, agent, consultant, or other participant (collectively
“Project Participants”), has, done any of the following:

          e   Participated in a project that:
                  o    Was not completed in accordance with requests or certified plans presented to
                       OHCS or other public or private allocating agencies;
                  o    Was not completed within the time schedule required by any agreement with OHCS
                       or within the budget indicated in the funding request;
                  o    Failed to properly or effectively utilize previously allocated Program funds and was
                      notified of such failure to meet appropriate utilization in advance of the request of
                      ORCA resources for a new application;
                  o   Failed to comply with prevailing wage or workers’ compensation laws.
                  o   Failed to comply with any contractual provision in an agreement between the
                      Project Participant and OHCS, including but not limited to provisions requiring
                      progress reports, record retention, or access to records of the project.
                  o   Was noncompliant with any OHCS Program rule as evidenced through OHCS, or
                      other public or private Allocating Agency, Project monitoring, and failed to cure such
                      noncompliance within the applicable cure period, if any
          e   Orhas been subject to any of the following:
                  o  Lien or default for failing to meet financial obligations, to delay or stop project
                     completion and sanctioned or removed as owner, developer, or General Partner by
                     other funders on a project with OHCS resources including allocated federal tax
                     credits
                  o  Debarment or other sanction by OHCS or other state, federal or local governmental
                      agency;
                  o   Debarment or other sanction by another Housing Finance Agency or Corporation in
                      the country




                                                                                                          OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                          COMMUNITY SERVICES
                 o   Conviction within the last (10) years of any type of criminal fraud,
                     misrepresentation, misuse of funds, crime of dishonesty, crime of moral turpitude,
                     or currently is under indictment for such an offense;
                 o   A bankruptcy proceeding within the last five (5) years;
                 o   Has been found in noncompliance with financial obligations or finishing a project as
                     legally required, and sanctioned or removed by other participating lenders and
                     investors.
        e   Or otherwise displayed an unwillingness to comply with OHCS requirements;


Besides the above factors, OHCS further reserves the right to not approve any application if, in OHCS’s
judgment, the proposed project is not consistent with the goals of providing decent, safe, and sanitary
housing for low-income people. OHCS may impose additional conditions on applicants for any Project as
part of the application, reservation, or allocation processes.



1.12 This ORCA and one (1) copy of each original application received, together with copies of all
documents pertaining to a Commitment, including the Reservation Letter, will be kept by OHCS and
made a part of a file or record, and be available for disclosure pursuant to the Oregon Public Records
Law.


1.13 An applicant or potential applicant seeking to challenge any aspect of this ORCA is subject to and
must comply with the provisions of OAR 813-005-0025 Solicitation Protests; Administrative and Judicial
Review, which provide:


(1)
        (a) With respect to any solicitation conducted by the department, an applicant or potential
        qualifying applicant may protest or otherwise challenge such solicitation process by first
        requesting administrative review as herein specified.


        (b) With respect to any solicitation conducted by the department, an applicant may protest or
        otherwise challenge any department determination or order (collectively hereinafter,
        “determination”) related to such solicitation by first requesting administrative review as herein
        specified.

        (c) A timely, qualifying request for administrative review is necessary to satisfy the conditions of
        this section and a condition precedent to judicial review consistent with ORS 183.480.


        (d) Failure to file a timely, qualifying request for administrative review with the department will
        constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies and terminate further rights to protest
        or otherwise challenge the solicitation process or any related department determination,
        including judicial review thereof.


(2)
        (a) An applicant under this section is a person or entity that makes an Application (including
        delivery to the department under the terms of the solicitation) for a department funding award
        pursuant to a particular department solicitation.




                                                                                                          OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                          COMMUNITY SERVICES
        (b) A potential qualifying applicant is a person or entity that qualifies to make an Application for
        a department funding award under the terms of a solicitation with respect to the process of
        which it requests administrative review consistent with the terms of this section.

(3)
        (a) An applicant or potential qualifying applicant seeking to protest or otherwise challenge any
        aspect of a solicitation process (other than a department determination related thereto) must
        request review by the department within fourteen (14) days of the Application due date of the
        solicitation.


        (b) An applicant seeking to protest or otherwise challenge a determination by the department
        related to a solicitation must request review by the department of such determination within
        fourteen (14) days of the applicant receiving notice from the department of that determination.

(4) Any request for review under this section must be in writing, specifically identifying:
        (a) The nature of the requestor’s interest, including the facts showing how the requestor is
        adversely affected or aggrieved by the solicitation process or a department determination;

        (b) The relief sought;

        (c) Each of the grounds for review;


        (d) An explanation for each of the grounds upon which relief should be granted; and

        (e) Any supporting information the requestor desires to have considered by the department.


(5) The envelope containing the request for review MUST:
        (a) Be marked PROTEST;


        (b) Identify the solicitation number;

        (c) Identify the closing time and date for acceptance of solicitation Applications;

        (d) Identify the department’s contact person for the solicitation; and

        (e) Be received by the department at its main Salem Office, Oregon Housing and Community
        Services 725 Summer Street NE, Suite B Salem, OR 97301, not later than 4:00 PM on the
        fourteenth (14th) day after the solicitation closing date or the applicant’s receipt of notice from
        the department of the department determination from which review is requested, whichever
        due date is applicable under this section.


(6) The applicant will be deemed to have received notice of a department determination upon the
sooner of:
        (a) Three (3) days after the department’s determination is mailed to the applicant;

        (b) Two (2) days after such determination is posted to the department’s website;




                                                                                                          OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                          COMMUNITY SERVICES
        (c) Two (2) days after the list of successful solicitation applicants is posted to the department’s
        website; or

        (d) One (1) day after such determination is emailed to the applicant.

(7) The department may request additional information from the requestor with respect to its request
and consider such other information as it deems appropriate.

(8) The department will endeavor to provide a written response to a timely, qualifying request for
review within thirty (30) days.

(9) Judicial review of the department response to a timely, qualifying request for review shall be limited
to those grounds the requestor raised with the department in its request for review.

(10) The filing of a request for review, or subsequent judicial review (if any), will not preclude the
department from moving forward with the solicitation or the award of funding assistance thereunder.
However, the department reserves the right to delay, terminate, modify, or take other action it
determines to be appropriate with respect to a solicitation or any related award of funding assistance in
response to a request for review or subsequent judicial review.

1.14 OHCS’ contact information is as follows:
Oregon Housing and Community Services, 725 Summer Street NE, Suite B Salem, OR 97301
Link to FAQ form to submit questions

1.15 Reservations, allocations or awards by OHCS (collectively, “Determinations”) may be subject to
Council review under ORS 456.561, and Determinations where additional OHCS funding supporting such
Determinations are subject to Council review, are contingent upon Council approval of those
Determinations or supporting funding. The Council may approve, reject, modify, or further condition
funding awards submitted for its review, thereby directly or indirectly impacting OHCS’ Determinations.

1.16 All reservations made pursuant to this ORCA are subject to the successful negotiation, execution,
and recording (if required) of any and all agreement documents. Projects that have only a leasehold
interest in relevant real property must include, among relevant agreement documents, binding
commitments executed and recorded by the landlord satisfactory to OHCS including, but not limited to,
restrictive covenants with respect to the ongoing use and operation of the real property and leasehold
interest for affordable housing acceptable to OHCS.

1.17 OHCS may charge, and the applicant shall pay, legal and administrative costs reasonably
anticipated or incurred by OHCS in negotiating and preparing agreement documents and other related
documents. OHCS also may charge, and applicant shall pay any other fees allowed by OHCS
administrative rules with respect to the application, ensuing reservation, award or allocation, and
Project operation.


1.18 Provisions stated in the form of a question in this ORCA shall be construed as required action by
applicants.

1.19 OHCS reserves all other rights not specifically identified herein, including but not limited to rights,
remedies, and requirements established in OHCS administrative rules or other law.




                                                                                                              OREGON HOUSING
                                                                                                              COMMUNITY SERVICES
