2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide




                      Interim Assessment
                                    Guide
                                   2025 — 26 School Year




                                                  Mathematics

                                         English Language Arts
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide




                                        OREGON        || Fautty.
                          ~             DEPARTMENT OF | Accountability,
                                        EDUCATIO ie               Excellence &
                          Oregon achieves...      together!       Integrity


It is the policy of the State Board of Education and a priority of the Oregon Department of Education that there will
be no discrimination or harassment on the grounds of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, national origin,
age or disability in any educational programs, activities or employment. Persons having questions about equal
opportunity and nondiscrimination should contact the Deputy Superintendent of Public Instruction with the
Oregon   Department of Education.


                                        OREGON DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                               255 Capitol Street NE
                                                 Salem, OR    97310
                                                   (503) 947-5600
                                           htto://www.oregon.gov/ode

                                               Dr. Charlene Williams
                                Director of the Oregon Department of Education
                                                     Dan Farley
     Assistant Superintendent, Office of Research, Assessment, Data, Accountability, and Reporting


                               ODE Assessment and Accountability Contacts
                       Andrea V. Lockard—Director, Assessment & Student Reporting
                                 Jon Wiens—Director, Accountability Reporting
                               Mariela Salas Bao—Science Assessment Specialist
              Tony Bertrand—English Language Arts and Social Sciences Assessment Specialist
                              Andrew Byerley—Mathematics Assessment Specialist
                              Sody Puth Fearn—K-2 Balanced Assessment Specialist
                               Audrey Lingley—SEED Survey Education Specialist
                            Mason Rivers—Special Education Assessment Specialist
                      Ben Wolcott—English Language Proficiency Assessment Specialist
                                     Beth LaDuca—NAEP State Coordinator
                                    Carla Martinez—Administrative Specialist
                                     Crys Plattner—Administrative Specialist
                           Holly Carter—Assessment Operations and Policy Analyst
Contact ode.assessmentteam @ode.oregon.gov            to signal errors or omissions in this Test Administration
Manual.

    All or any part of this document may be photocopied for educational purposes without permission from the
                    Oregon Department of Education and distributed for the cost of reproduction.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



Table of Contents
  Section 1.0: Introduction to the Guide..............ccccsceeecsececceecceccescnecensceeseescesseesonsceeeonsoessonsoeseonsons 5
  1.1 Intended AUCICNCE............eeee                              eee sesseneeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaeaeeeeeceeeeee
                                                                                            eee eeeeeaaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeenenesaaaaaaeaaeceeeeeeeeeeeeenens 5
  1.2 Purpose Of the GUIdE ...........eeeeeessssteceeceeceeceseeeseeeeesaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees
                                                                  eee eaGGGeeeeeeeeeeeseeeee eee eaaaaeeeeeeeseseseeesens 5
  1.3 Organization Of the GUIdC ........ cc ccccccccccccecesceseeseseeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeasaeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesaaaaeaeeaeeeeeeseeeesees 5
  1.4 Training and Sample Te@Sts ........ccccccccsscssccnseenseeseseeeeeeeseeeseeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeeceeceeceeseeseeeseeneeaas 5

  1.5 Help Desk/Customer Service ........ccccccccssssccessssceecessseeceseseeeeceseeeeceseaeseseaeeeecesseeecesasesesesaeeeesesaeesesesaeeeses 6

  Section 2.0: Overview of the Interim Assessment SySteM...........cssccsscssccsscssccsscssscsscsesssceescssceesaes 7

  2.1 Overview of a Balanced Assessment SYStOM...........ccccsessssseseeceeceeceescsscesesseaseaeeceeeeeeeessessesesseaaeaeeseeeeess 7

  2.2 Key Features of the OSAS Interim ASSCSSMENES ..........:ccssssssssccccceceeceseesseseensaeeaeeeceeceeeesseesesseaaaaeaeeeeeess 8

     2.2.1 Types and Features Of INterim ASSESSMENTS ........cccssessssccsecccccscsssseseescaausaeseseeceecesssesecasaaaasseseess 8

     2.2.2 Interim ASSESSMENT BIOCKS uu... eeessssssecccceceeceeceseesnssseasaaeaeeeceeeeecessessasasaaaaseeceeeeeceeseesnessasaasaaaeeeeegs 9
     2.2.3 Focused Interim Assessment BIOCKS .......ccccceccesseseesssnaceceeceeeceecesensseaaaaaseceeceeeseeeeseeensasasaaaaaeaeeees 10
  2.3 Interim ASSESSMENT BIUCPFINKS ...........cccccccecceeceeceeceeceeeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeneeseeaeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeesesseeeeseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeens 10

  Section 3.0: Tasks to be Completed                                         Prior to the Administration ................csscecsscscsscscsscsssscessnees 11

  3.1 Checklist OF ACtIVITIOS .0.... eee cceceeseneceeceeeesaaeeeeeeeeeeaeaeeeeeeessaeeeeeeeseesaaeceeeeeseaaaeeceeseesaaeaeeeeeeeeaaaeseeeesagas 11
  3.2 Accessing the Test Administrator Interface and Student Interface .............cccccccessceceeceeceeeeeeseeseeseeass 11

  3.3 REBIStering StUCENKS 0.0... cecccceeceeseeseseeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeee
                                                                             see seeaaeaaeeaaeaaaaaaaaaaeaaeeaeeenegenes 12

  Section 4.0: Administering the Interim Assessments ON]ine ............cccceccecsscsscsscescescescescecesseseens 12

  4.1 Online Test Delivery System and Technology REQUIrFeMENs .........ccccccccccececeeceeceeceeeeeeaeeeneenseeeseeeeeees 12

     4.1.1 TCSt REOSONS..eeeeeecccssssssseeeeee                           eee eeeeeeeeeeeee eee eeee eee eee eee AAA AAAA AAA EEEEEEAAEAAAA AAA EEEEEEESEAGAAAAGEEEEEEEEESAAAGAEE
                                                                                                                                                                         EE EEEEEEEES 12

  A.2 REMOTE TOSTRING 0... .eeeeccccccnnnessseeeeeecee anes eeeeeeeeeeeee eae eeeeeeeeeeeee aaa seeeeeeeeeeeeaeesseeeeeeeeeeaaeaasaeeeeeeceeauaauaaeeeeeeees 13

     4.2.1 Guidelines for Administering Interim Assessments in Remote ENvirOnMeNnt.......cccccccccccesseseeees 13

  Section 5.0: Guidelines for Administering the Interim ASSESSMENHS..........c.sccsccssccsscnsccsscssccsscees 14
  5.1 Standardized vs Non-Standardized Test AAMINiStration ........eceeeeeeeeeeeeeenaceceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeaees 15
     5.1.1 Standardized Test AQMINiStration..u...ececcccccccescsesesnsnnseceeeceeceecessesssnsaasasasseeseeseeseseeessuasasaaaaseeeeees 15
     5.1.2 Non-standardized Test AAMINIStratiOn .........ccccseeeessnsnneceeceeceeeeesseseeensaaseasecseseecessensessssasasanseaeeees 15
     5.1.3 Criteria for Selecting Standardized Test AAMINIStrATION ........ccccccssessesssessesssessesessessesssseseesseeeeeecs 16

  5.2 Guidelines for Administering Interim Assessments in Remote Instructional Environments............ 17

  5.3 TeSt SQCUIILY 0...                          ccessseeeeeceecee ene eeeeeeeeee eee eaeeeeeeeeeee eee aeeeeeeeeeeee cease ee eeeeeeeee GAA GAA AEEEEEESSA GSC GGG AEEEEEESCeses GEE HAEEES 18

     5.3.1 Responding to Testing Improprieties, Irregularities, ANA BreQChES ........ccccccsssssessssseeceessseeeeessees 18
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



  5.4 ACCOMMOAMAtIONS AN ACCESSIBILITY .........ceeececcceccecceecceceecceeeeeeeeeeeaeeaaeeaeeeeseaeeeseseeeeeseeeseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 19

  5.5 Use of Calculators oo. eeeccccscecccssessneceeeeeseeneeeeeeessseaeeeeeeesaaeeeeeeessesaaeeceeeesesaaeeeeeseesaaeeeeeeeeeeaaaeeeeeensags 19
  5.6 Electronic D@VICES oo... ceeceeeeeeeeeeeneeeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaaaeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeesaaaaaaeeaeeceseeeeeeenstsaaaaaaeaeeeeeeas 20
  5.7 SCratCh PAPE .....ccecccccsscsssseeseeseeeeesesseeeeseseeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeseeeeeaeeaeeeaaeaaeaaaaaaaaaaaaeeaeeeenes 20

  5.8 Breaks ........ceceeeeeeesesneaceceeceeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeaaaaeaaeceeeeeeeeeeeeeneeaaaaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeeseeeneaaaaaeaeeeeseeees 21
  5.9 Verbal Instructions/Script .........cc:cccccssscccsssscceecsssceecesseeseessseeeesesseeecesasesesseseeessesseeseeseseeessesaeesessaaesengas 21

  Section 6.0: Viewing Scores ANd ReESUIES ..........ccccscceccecsscsscsscsscescnscesceccecescescecceccescesceseesessessessos 21

  6.1            Hand Scoring for Constructed RESPONSE ItOMS ........ccccccceecsssseseensnnseaceeceeceecescesseesesnensaaeeseeeeeeees 22

  6.2.           Understanding Results for the Interim ASSESSMENTS ...........:.cccsessssssceceeceeeceeceseeseesnesaaeaeeceeeeees 22
        6.2.1.          GroUp-Level RESUIES.......cccsssssessssssesssessssssssssssssssscescesseesseeseeseeeseessssssaaascasaasaaaaaanaaaaaaaaagaaaaaes 22

        6.2.2.          Student-Level RESUItS .0.....ccceccesceeeesnsnnnneceeceeeceeceesesesessasaaaaaeaeeceeeseesesseseseaaaaaaaaaeaseseeeseseeeeeees 22
        6.2.3.          Itern-Level RESUIES .........eessesecccccccecesceseeenenencaneneeeceeceecessseseeusasaaaaseeceeseesesseesaeassasaaeaeeeeeeeen® 22
        6.2.4.          Item DistractOr ANALYSIS .........ssccssssssessssssssssssssssssescesceesseeseessessscsseassaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaagasaaaes 22

  6.3.           Reporting Performance for IABs and Focused JABS .............:ccscesssnesececeeceeeceecesseseesneaaaeaeeeeeeeees 22
  Section 7.0: Viewing Scores ANd RESUIES ..........ccccsccecceccscsscsscescescescesceccecessescesceccnccesoesssescessessons 22

  7.1            Centralized Reporting SySteM OVErVICW .......:.ccccsscsscssscsssesssseeseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeceeesesseseeeneeaas 23

        7.1.1           Aggregate-Level RESUItS............cscsssssssssssssssssssssssssceeseeseeeseessessscasecsecaanaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaagasanses 23

        7.1.2           GroUp-Level RESUIES.......cccsssssessssssesssessssssssssssssssscescesseesseeseeseeeseessssssaaascasaasaaaaaanaaaaaaaaagaaaaaes 23

        7.1.3           Student-Level RESUItS .0.....ccceccesceeeesnsnnnneceeceeeceeceesesesessasaaaaaeaeeceeeseesesseseseaaaaaaaaaeaseseeeseseeeeeees 24
        7.1.4           Itern-Level RESUIES .........eessesecccccccecesceseeenenencaneneeeceeceecessseseeusasaaaaseeceeseesesseesaeassasaaeaeeeeeeeen® 24
  7.2            Links to the Interim CONNECTIONS PlayliStS........cccccccesceeceesecsssessseessesessesseeseseeseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 25

  Section 8.0: Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) ...........cccccsscssccsscsssssscsssssscsscscesscescessesscessoes 26
  8.1 Purpose of the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) ...............:::csssesssesseeseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaes 27

  8.2 Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) Features .............:.cc:sssssssssesseesceescenceeceeeeeeseeeeeeeeseeeseeseeseeaaanaas 27

  8.3 TeSt SQCUIILY .....ceeeecceecceccce cee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee eee eeeeeeeeee Gee e se nEEEEEE AGA AAA AAEEEEEEEE;;;;A;AEEEEEEEEES;CO;;; GEE AEEEEEESCeseA EEE HAEEES 27

  8.4 Accessibility RCSOUPCES ........ccccccccceeceeeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeaaee
                                                                aaa eae eae eeee ess sss EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEESEEEEES 27

  8.5 Using the Interim Assessment Item Portal 0.0... ccssssssssssssessecsssessseeeeeeeeeeceeeeeeceeceeseeeeeeceeseeeseeseeeeeaas 28

  Section 9.0: Oregon Tools for Teachers OVerview.........ccsscssccsscssccsscnsccsscsssssscsccsscesscescessasscessaaes 31

  9.1 Smarter Balanced Tools for Teachers OVErVieW .........c:sccccecesssseceeceeesseseeceeeeseeuaeeceeeeseeaaeeeeeseeseaeaeeeens 31
  9.2 Accessing Tools for T@achelS ..........ccscseeesessnneceeceeceeeceseeeseseeneaeeeeeeeeeeeeeesseeeeesaaaeaeeseeeeeeeeeseseeeeeeaaqaaes 32

 Appendix A: Additional reSOUrces...........ccccsccecceccscsscsscnscnscescncscnscescescescescecceccecceccesessensessescesouss 33
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



Section 1.0: Introduction to the Guide

1.1 Intended Audience

This Interim Assessment Guide for Administration is intended for staff who play a role in the
administration of, and review of results for, Oregon’s interim assessments.


1.2 Purpose of the Guide
This document consolidates all the information about interim assessments in English language arts (ELA)
and mathematics into one resource. (For information on OSAS Science Interim Assessments, please see
the Science Interim Assessment Quick Guide.) This includes information on the types of interim
assessments -- Interim Assessment Blocks (IABs) and Focused IABs -- guidelines for administering the
assessment for both non-standardized and standardized administrations, test security, accommodations
and accessibility, hand scoring by district/school educators, viewing results in the Centralized Reporting
System (CRS), and accessing Connections Playlists available for ELA and Math in Tools for Teachers. In
most cases the guide is informational and does not mandate administration procedures. Unlike
summative assessments, the interim assessments can be administered flexibly by teachers to best meet
their instructional needs (e.g., in a standardized or non-standardized manner).


1.3 Organization of the Guide
The guide is organized into the following sections:

    e   Overview of the Interim Assessment System: an overview of the IABs and Focused IABs.
    e   Tasks to be Completed Prior to Administration: the steps that need to happen before
        administering the interim tests to students.

    e   Administering the Interim Assessments Online: an overview of the test administration site and
        the student testing site and how to complete important tasks and functions.

    e   Guidelines for Administering the Interim Assessments: general test rules and policies for the
        interim tests.

    e   Hand Scoring Constructed-Response Items: instructions for local hand scoring of constructed-
        response items.

    e   Viewing Scores and Results: an overview of the reports available in the Centralized Reporting
        System.

    e   Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP): an overview of the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP)
        purpose, features, and considerations for non-standardized administration.

    e   Tools for Teachers Overview: an overview of the resources available to educators and how to
        access the Tools for Teachers website.

    e   Additional Resources: provide links to additional resources, guidance, and support.

1.4 Training and Sample Tests
Training and Sample Tests allow students the opportunity to become familiar with both the testing
environment and different kinds of test questions. Access Training and Sample Tests on the OSAS Portal.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



                                         Table 1. Resource Overview

     Resource                                        Description of Resource
 Sample               Provides access to released test items to show what the questions look like.
 Items                Sharing these resources can help explain the assessments to families and other
 ~~                   interest holders.
                      Practice Tests are fixed form tests that include similar computer adaptive test
                      (CAT) items and performance tasks (PTs) for grades 3-8 and high school. Each test
 Practice             includes about 20 questions plus a performance task (PT) for each grade and
 Test                 content area. These tests give students and Test Administrators (TAs) a chance to
                      try out the question types, format, and online tools used in the OSAS General
                      Tests.
                      Training Tests are shorter and include six questions that show every type of
 Training             interaction students will see in their grade band. Training Tests are available for
 Test                 grade bands 3-5, 6-8, and high school. These short tests help students and Test
                      Administrators (TAs) get familiar with the item types, test format, and online tools.

* For more information, reference the ODE Assessment Resources Use Chart which provides a side-by-
side comparison of training tests, practice tests, and interim assessments to help teachers decide which
tool best fits their needs.


Users (educators, students, and interest holders) can log into the Practice Tests and Training Tests as a
“guest” and do not require login credentials. Practice Tests and Training Tests do not require the use of
the secure browser except for the use of some accommodations, which require the use of assistive
technology. Secure browsers may be used to become familiar with the functionality of the test delivery
system with the student’s assistive technology software or device. Test administrators (TAs) may also
access the Practice Test using the Test Administrator (TA) Interface to practice setting up test sessions.


1.5 Help Desk/Customer Service
Regional ESD Partners provide the primary support for the OSAS System (e.g., test administrator
accounts, TIDE student test settings, clarification on test administration guidance). The OSAS Portal
contains additional resources for Oregon’s Interim Assessment System.


For questions regarding the online testing system or for additional technical assistance, contact the
OSAS Helpdesk. The Helpdesk is open Monday-Friday 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. PT (except holidays).


                      Oregon Statewide Assessment System Helpdesk

                      Toll-Free Phone Support: 1-866-509-6257

                      Email Support: osashelpdesk@cambiumassessment.com

                      Chat Support: https://osasportal.org/chat.stm|


The full list of contact support resources can be found on ODE’s Student Assessment webpage.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



Section 2.0: Overview of the Interim Assessment System

2.1 Overview of a Balanced Assessment System
The Oregon Statewide Assessment System helps schools measure student learning in a fair and reliable
way. It provides educators, students, and families with clear and useful information to support student
success. This system is aligned with the English Language Arts/Literacy (ELA) and mathematics (math)
state content standards and includes three components to improve teaching and learning:
            e     Summative Assessments
            e     Interim Assessments
            e     Tools for Teachers Instructional Resources (e.g., lessons)

                                     Figure 1. Overview of a Balanced Assessment System

                                                          SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENTS
                             Computer adaptive tests—online assessments that adjust their level of difficulty based on
                             student responses— administered at the end of the year to grades 3-8 and in high school to
                             determine students’ progress toward college and career readiness in ELA and Math.




                                                                      SUMMATIVE
                                                STATE                ASSESSMENTS                 COLLEGE AND
                                             STANDARDS                                     @    CAREER READY
            TOOLS   FOR TEACHERS                                                                               >   INTERIM ASSESSMENTS

 A website with resources and strategies to                9         Resources and                        Optional and flexible tests for use in grades
                .              .        ;                            data to support                                .
 supplement curriculum, target instructional                          teaching and                        3-8 and high school that enable teachers to
                                                                        learning
 needs, and support professional learning.                                                                check student proficiency throughout the
 Lessons are created and vetted by                                                                        year and provide instructional next steps.
                                                                                          INTERIM
 educators and contain best practices for                TOOLS FOR        ]
                                                         TEACHERS                      ASSESSMENTS
 formative assessment, differentiation, and
 accessibility.                                                                @

Summative assessments are administered by states to provide aggregate data to schools and districts to
help inform school and program improvement goals. Summative assessment results are also used as an
accountability measure at the end of the year to determine students’ progress toward college and
career readiness in English language arts/literacy (ELA) and mathematics.


In contrast, interim assessments can be used any time throughout the year to support the formative
assessment process. Along with Tools for Teachers, they help guide instruction throughout the school
year.
        e       Both the OSAS Interim Assessment tests and Tools for Teachers are available at no cost to
                Oregon educators to provide additional formative assessment strategies and instructional
                resources.

All test items for OSAS summative and interim assessments are developed using the same ELA and
mathematics item and task specifications, and they undergo the same item writing, review, and field-
testing processes. Assessment items are developed through collaboration with K-12 educators and
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



higher education faculty, facilitated by the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium. Items on the
interim assessments are selected from the same pool of items as the summative assessment items.


Educator involvement in the development of summative, interim, formative, and instructional resources
is critical. Hundreds of teachers from multiple states have contributed to each step of the development,
from writing test questions to creating the resources in Tools for Teachers.


2.2 Key Features of the OSAS Interim Assessments
Interim assessments allow teachers to check student progress throughout the year, so educators can
use the results to inform instruction and help students meet the challenge of the Oregon Standards. The
OSAS interim assessments may be administered at multiple points throughout the school year and are
available in ELA, mathematics, and science in grades 3-8 and high school; however, teachers may
administer individual assessments at any grade level. Out-of-grade-level interim administration is a local
decision (e.g., administration of a grade 4 interim to students in grade 3, or a grade 3 interim to students
in grade 4). The optional and flexible tests can also be used to inform instruction (e.g., follow-up lessons
on a targeted skill or concept, or small groups of students working collaboratively to find answers to
questions).


There are two types of OSAS interim assessments:
    e   Interim Assessment Blocks (IABs) and
    e   Focused IABs.


All [ABs and Focused IABs draw from a shared bank of items, including performance tasks, meaning that
some IABs and Focused IABs may share items.


The OSAS interim assessments are computer-based assessments. All interim assessments offer the same
universal tools, designated supports, and accommodations available on the summative assessment.
Unlike the summative assessments (which are adaptive), [ABs and Focused IABs are fixed-form tests,
which means that each student has access to the same test questions and the tests do not adapt
according to student responses. Because each student responds to the same test items, teachers may
more easily interpret their students’ performance on a common set of items. Further, teachers can
better manage hand scoring since all students respond to the same constructed-response questions.

2.2.1 Types and Features of Interim Assessments
Interim Assessments are considered semi-secure, so they can be used flexibly at multiple points during
the academic year and based on teacher professional judgement. The OSAS Interim Assessment
Overview Catalog is updated annually to provide more detailed information about the Interim
Assessments and lists the available Interim Assessment Blocks (IABs) and Focused IABs (FIABs).


There are over 200 Interim Assessment Blocks (IABs) and Focused Interim Assessment Blocks (FIABs)
across grades and content areas. They provide information about students’ performance in three
reporting categories: Above Standard, At/Near Standard, and Below Standard.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



                                   Table 2. Interim Assessment         at a Glance


 Features of Interims                                Interim                                      Focused Interim
                                                     Assessment Blocks                           Assessment Blocks
                                                     (IABs)                                      (FIABs)
                                         Smaller bundles of concepts and
 Standards Covered                                                                      Fine-grain concepts and skills
                                                       skills

 Targets Covered                               Assesses 4 — 8 Targets                      Assesses 1 — 3 Targets

 Average Testing Time                              45 -—55 mins                                 35 —50 mins

 Items                                             ~3-18       items                           ~10-15      items

                                          Measure student proficiency
                                                                                     Engage in the formative process
                                         after units of study to address
                                                                                          and Tools for Teachers
                                          strengths and for individual
 Possible Use*                                                                       strategies at regular intervals to
                                         improvement needs with the
                                                                                            check in on student
                                          use of tailored lessons from
                                                                                              understanding.
                                               Tools for Teachers.
                                        Student performance at Below,                Student performance at Below,
                                         At/Near, and Above Standard                  At/Near, and Above Standard
 Reporting                              reporting categories and Writing             reporting categories in relation
                                        trait scores for ELA performance             to Focused Interim Assessment
                                                    tasks (PTs).                              Blocks (FIABs).

Note: The asterisk in Table 2 shows that the listed uses are just examples, not a complete list

2.2.2 Interim Assessment Blocks
Interim Assessment Blocks (IABs) are short sets of items that assess as many as four to eight assessment
targets. Assessment targets are the specific skills measured within each claim, and Interim Assessment
Blocks (IABs) focus on specific domains, areas of a claim, or strands (e.g., Measurement and Data,
Fractions, Read Informational Text).


Interim Assessment Blocks (IABs) are more granular, so teachers can administer them throughout the
school year or align them to the sequence of their local curriculum. If an Interim Assessment Block (IAB)
is administered more than once, educators should consider that repeated exposure to the same items
may affect student scores over time.

Keep in mind for administering Interim Assessment Blocks (IABs):
    e    Can typically be scheduled in one 45 — 55-minute class period
         Teachers can use Interim Assessment Blocks (IABs) to check students’ understanding
         Actual times will vary depending on how the assessments are administered
             o     These tests are not timed
             o     Estimates do not account for any time needed to start computers, log in students, or
                   take breaks

         Each Interim Assessment Block (IAB) has a corresponding Interim Connections Playlist in Tools
         for Teachers
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



    e      Interim Connections Playlists (ICPs) include resources to support instructional next steps
    e      Educators access Interim Connections Playlist (ICPs) through the Interim Report or by searching
           the Tools for Teachers website

2.2.3 Focused Interim Assessment Blocks
Focused Interim Assessment Blocks (FIABs) help teachers gain a better understanding of students’
knowledge and academic performance and provide precise next steps for instruction. Focused Interim
Assessment Blocks (FIABs) are designed to measure smaller bundles of content and assess no more than
three Assessment Targets to offer a deeper understanding of students’ knowledge and skills.

Keep in mind for administering Focused Interim Assessment Blocks (FIABs):
    e      Can typically be scheduled in one 45—55 min. class period
    e      Teachers can use Focused Interim Assessment Blocks (FIABs) to check students’ understanding
    e      Actual times will vary depending on how the assessments are administered
               o   These tests are not timed
               o   Estimates do not account for any time needed to start computers, log in students, or
                   take breaks

    e      Each Interim Assessment Block (IAB) has a corresponding Interim Connections Playlist in Tools
           for Teachers
    e      Interim Connections Playlists (ICPs) include resources to support instructional next steps
    e      Educators access Interim Connections Playlist (ICPs) through the Interim Report or by searching
           the Tools for Teachers website

2.3 Interim Assessment Blueprints
The Interim Assessment Blueprints provide additional information about the content measured by each
assessment. They include details about which Claim(s), Assessment Target(s), and Depth of Knowledge
level(s) (DOK) are addressed, as well as the number of items by Target or Target group. Blueprints also
include the number of items for each Assessment Target and information about alignment to
Summative Assessments and Claims.

The Interim Assessment Block (IAB) Blueprints can help educators plan how to integrate Interim
Assessment Blocks (IABs) into classroom instruction and better understand reported results. They also
show which Assessment Targets are addressed in each specific Interim Assessment Block (IAB) and the
relative emphasis of each Target. For example, a fifth-grade teacher may want more information about
students’ knowledge of geometry. The teacher could use the Grade 5 Geometry Interim Assessment
Block (IAB) Blueprint to see that this Interim Assessment Block (IAB) includes 13 machine-scored items
across four Claims: Concepts and Procedures, Problem-Solving, Communicating Reasoning, and
Modeling and Data Analysis.

The interim assessment blueprints are available for download from the ODE Interim Assessment
website.
    e      ELA/Literacy IAB Blueprint
    e      Mathematics IAB Blueprint
    e      ELA Literacy Focused IAB Blueprint
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



    e      Mathematics Focused IAB Blueprint


The Interim Assessments Overview Catalog lists the available [ABs and Focused IABs across grades 3-8
and high school. This document is updated annually and posted on the ODE Interim Assessment
website.


Section 3.0: Tasks to be Completed                Prior to the Administration

3.1 Checklist of Activities
Only trained Test Administrators (TAs) who have completed Training Module 10: Interims: Remote
Administration and Test Security posted on the Assessment Training Materials webpage can administer
OSAS Interim Assessments. TAs must work with their School Test Coordinator (STC) or District Test
Coordinator (DTC) to have the “Interim” test group added in TIDE.

To have a successful testing experience, the following tasks should be completed before scheduling the
assessments:
    e   STCs or DTCs need to apply the “Interim” Test Group to each user who will administer the
           interim assessments. This user permission must be set in TIDE via the View/Edit User interface
           or the User Upload module. Users will not be able to administer the interim assessments if the
           Test Group permission is not assigned to their user account.
               o    If the TA is a returning user from the prior year and already has a TA account within the
                    TIDE system, there are no additional requirements to apply the “Interim” Test Group
                    once they have completed the required Interim Assessment Training Module.
               o    However, if an educator does not have a TA user role associated with the district from
                    the prior year, they must complete the reading requirements included in Table 5 of the
                    Test Administration Manual and the ODE-provided training modules 2 — 4 posted to the
                    Assessment Training Materials webpage.
    e      Each student must have accurate test settings in TIDE, including designated supports and
           accommodations     based on individual student needs for each content area. Incorrect test
           settings must be updated in TIDE before testing.
    e = It is highly recommended that all students take the Training and Sample Tests for each content
           area before testing. Students can become familiar with the item types, universal tools, buttons,
           and any allowable designated supports and/or accommodations in the online testing site via the
           Training and Sample Tests.
    e      TAs should identify if headsets are needed for testing. Headsets are required for the ELA
           listening items, for students who need text-to-speech, and for students requiring audio
           glossaries.


3.2 Accessing the Test Administrator Interface and Student Interface
TAs and students will use the same testing interface located on the OSAS Portal for administration of
any IABs and Focused IABs. TAs will navigate to the Interim Assessments tab located at the top of the
OSAS Portal to be directed to the additional interim assessment resources (i.e., Assessment Viewing
Application, TA Interface, etc).
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



Users of the OSAS Interim Assessment System should verify the following to ensure TAs and students
can access the TA or Student Interface before administration:
    e    Technology personnel have set up computers for testing, including conducting network
         diagnostics and downloading the latest version of the Secure Browser from the OSAS Portal.
             o     For remote testing, students can take the interim assessments without the Secure
                   Browser, ona Chrome web browser. For iPads, Safari browser is supported. Please refer
                   to the additional information included in the Remote Test Administration Certification
                   course posted within the OSAS Portal.


3.3 Registering Students
In order for students to access the assigned IABs or Focused IABs, each student must be correctly
assigned to their school and grade in TIDE. TIDE, or the Test Information Distribution Engine, is the
system used to manage student settings and user accounts across all OSAS systems. Incorrect student
information must be updated prior to testing. For additional information on navigating TIDE, please
refer to the TIDE User Guide, which uses a step-by-step approach to using the enhanced user
management       system.



Section 4.0: Administering the Interim Assessments Online

4.1 Online Test Delivery System and Technology Requirements
The interim assessments are administered online through the Test Delivery System (TDS) using the same
directions for administration as the summative assessments. For information about policies and
procedures that govern secure and valid test administration, refer to the Oregon Test Administration
Manual (TAM). For information on how to operate the TA Interface, refer to the Test Administrator User
Guide.
The interim assessments include the same universal tools, embedded designated supports, and
embedded accommodations as the ELA and Math summative assessments. District- and school-level
users can set individual student test settings for each content area in the Test Information and
Distribution Engine (TIDE) prior to testing. For more information on how to update student test settings
in TIDE, refer to the T/DE User Guide.
The same Secure Browser as used for the OSAS summative tests may also be used for interim
assessments. For instruction on downloading and installing the Secure Browser, please refer to the
Secure Browsers page on the OSAS Portal. Students may also access the interim assessments remotely
using supported web browsers. See section 4.2. Remote Testing for more information.

4.1.1 Test Reasons

TAs must choose a test reason in the TA Interface when administering interim assessments. Test reasons
are categories used to classify all test opportunities in a test session for organizational purposes in the
Centralized Reporting System. Test reasons may only be selected for interim assessments.

After selecting and verifying the assessment(s) to be administered during the test session, the TA
chooses a Session Type and Test Reason in the Session Settings section of the Test Selection Window.
The TA then clicks the [Start Operational Tests Session] button to begin the test session and generate
the Session ID that students use to join that test session.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



                                                                  Figure 1. Test Selection Window



   Operational Tests                 Test Selection                                                                                                                 Q   x

   Filter By:                                                                                                  “Hl Tests Selected                               Oi Clear All

   Interim ELA and Math                                                                    52                  Interim ELA and Math
   Choose which tests to add to your session from the tree, and then start your session.                       Grade 3 ELA - Read Informational Texts (IAB)

                                                                                                       ;       Grade 3 ELA - Read Literary Texts (IAB)
        —   Interim English    Language   Arts (ELA)                                        |
                                                                                                       :       Grade 3 ELA - Research (IAB)
                  —    Interim Assessment Blocks (IAB)                                      a                                                 .
                                                                                                       |       Grade 5 ELA - Read Informational Texts (IAB)

                                ian ae                                                      |                  Grade 6 ELA - Text Analysis (Informational) (FIAB)              .
                                + Grade4                                                    C]
                              a                                                                 —_ 7           Select Test Reason

                              L---                                                              =
                                +      Grade 6                                                             v

                                                         Back                                                  C)   Add to Operational Tests Session




4.2 Remote Testing
Typically, students use the Secure Browser to take interim assessments at school. ODE further supports
teaching and learning by allowing teachers to administer interim tests remotely. Students may access
the interim assessments remotely using the Secure Browser, the Secure Test iPad app, or the following
web browsers — Chrome 138 or higher, Firefox 138 or higher, Edge 138 or higher and Safari 17 or higher.

To administer an interim assessment remotely, TAs will first select “Start a Remote Session” from the
Test Administration home page, then select the tests to administer remotely. A URL will be generated
that can be shared with students in addition to the test session ID. For information on how to administer
interim assessments remotely, please refer to the Quick Guide to Administering Interim Assessments
Remotely.

4.2.1 Guidelines for Administering Interim Assessments in Remote Environments
Districts and schools have the flexibility to allow teachers to administer and students to take interim
assessments remotely under the following conditions:
    e   An authorized employee (e.g., teacher, Test Administrator) ina school administers the test
                consistent with the district or school policies for in-person interim assessment administration.
    e           Students must have both the "Remote Tester" flag and “Parental Consent for A/V Monitoring”
                option set in TIDE.
    e           The Test Administrator monitors the test activity such that tests are open only for the minimum
                amount of time necessary for students to complete and submit their responses.
    e           The Test Administrator uses established test administration practices to support students
                accessing the interim assessments; this may be a phone call or chat with a parent in advance of
                starting the test.
    e           The Test Administrator maintains student data privacy with student State-wide Student
                Identifiers (SSID) and other personally identifiable information (PII), which are required to take
                an interim. (E.g., do not send PIl over email, chat, or text or other non-secure transmission
                methods. Please refer to local policies regarding communicating PII.)
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



    e   The Test Administrator follows state and local policies regarding test security and immediately
        escalates to the test coordinator any suspected item security issue (e.g., posting on social
        media).


Section 5.0: Guidelines for Administering the Interim Assessments
The following factors should be considered when administering the interim assessments:
Interim assessment types: Districts/schools may elect to administer [ABs and Focused IABs or any type
of interim assessments during the school year.
Multiple administrations: Members have the flexibility to re-administer interim assessments up to five
times per student per school year.
These decisions should be made as part of a larger assessment context that includes the purpose of the
interim assessment, how the interim assessment will be scored, and how the data from the interim
assessment will be used to improve teaching and learning.
Fixed forms: There is only one form of each IAB and Focused IAB per grade and content area.
All interims are fixed-form tests, so students who take an interim for a second time see the same
questions in the same order.

Exposure to and familiarity with test questions may affect student performance and the accuracy of
interim results.
Grade levels: The IABs/Focused IABs are comprised of items aligned to the Oregon Standards in grades
3-11 (alignment to the 2021 Oregon Math High School Standards will be occurring over the coming
months).
Administering the interim assessments is not constrained by grade level.
Students may take an off-grade-level interim assessment to help inform educators on skills and
knowledge a student has from previous grades, or from an advanced-level course.
Untimed: The IABs/Focused IABs are untimed tests.
Many IABs administered under a standardized administration can be completed in about one class
period, but some may take more than one period.
Hand scoring: With the exception of the Math Performance Task IAB, all math [ABs/Focused IABs are
machine-scored.
Most ELA IABs/Focused IABs items are machine-scored.
However, there are some constructed-response items, including the performance task research item,
that need to be hand-scored. This is a local responsibility.
The ELA Focused IAB full write composition is machine-scored using artificial intelligence technology.
However, educators can still override scores in the reporting system based on their evaluation of
student writing using the OSAS Writing Scoring Rubrics.
Hand scoring is a valuable professional development activity that provides educators with an
understanding of the scoring process and the expectations for student learning.
Local scoring is not subject to the rigorous quality controls (validity papers, double scoring, score
verification) used for the summative assessments, although educators engaged in hand scoring of
interim assessment items should use the scoring guides that are provided to ensure consistent results.
To view which ELA interim assessments require hand scoring, please see the ELA IAB and Focused IAB
Blueprints available on the Test Development page of the Smarter Content Explorer.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



5.1 Standardized vs Non-Standardized Test Administration

The Interim Assessments can be administered flexibly by teachers to best meet their instructional needs.
All student results will note the manner in which the assessment was administered (standardized/non-
standardized).

5.1.1 Standardized Test Administration

What Is Standardized Administration?
Standardized administration means that a student completes the Interim Assessment individually,
following the procedure for administration used for the Summative Assessments. The manner of
administration does not change the scoring of the Interim Assessment.

Why Does the Type of Administration Matter?
    e   The manner of administration is provided to help educators contextualize important factors
        about the conditions for the assessment when viewing, analyzing, interpreting, and
        understanding the results.
    e   Standardized administration affords the opportunity to use comparable data across classrooms,
        buildings, and subgroups based on the content assessed.
    e   The data can inform decision-making about instructional next steps, professional learning needs,
        and curriculum gaps.
    e   For students who have been assigned accessibility features, it is also an opportunity to practice
        using universal tools, designated supports, and accommodations as described in the Oregon
        Accessibility Manual. Familiarity with these features in advance of the Summative test will help
        students use them with confidence.

Benefits for Educators
Results from a standardized administration can be interpreted in a consistent manner and used as a
gauge of student learning that is comparable across students. In this approach, the Interim Assessment
is used as an assessment of learning after a period of instruction, and results reflect an individual
student’s mastery of the concepts assessed.

5.1.2 Non-standardized Test Administration

If the purpose is to inform instruction within a classroom, an educator may choose to administer an
Interim in a non-standardized way. This means the administration does not follow the requirements
used for the Summative Assessment.

Examples include:
    e   Administering tests while students answer cooperatively in pairs, in small groups, or as a whole
        class. Teachers may include discussion time between test items. For example, a teacher may
        read each item aloud using a think-aloud strategy or allow discussion between items before
        each student completes the assessment individually with this assisted support.
    e   Administering tests individually with modified standardized requirements. For example,
        provide scaffolded support for all students’ questions. Log the questions being asked during test
        administration to inform instruction using student misconceptions and barriers during the
        assessment.
    e   Having students self-assess or provide peer feedback on short-answer and extended-response
        questions by having students hand-score items.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



    e   Use Interim Assessment resources and tools other than those approved in the Oregon
        Accessibility Manual (e.g., use of text-to-speech, a script, or a multiplication table by a student
        who does not have an IEP and a documented need for this accommodation).

Benefits for Educators
Results from non-standardized administration are most appropriate for use as formative assessment
(assessment for learning), rather than Summative (assessment of learning). Because this approach does
not describe student performance in a comparable way, caution should be used when interpreting
classroom results.

When deciding how to administer an Interim Assessment, consider the purpose. Is it an assessment OF
learning or an assessment FOR learning? For example:
    e   Using standardized administration at the beginning of a unit can serve as an assessment
                                                                                              for
        learning if the information helps inform instructional next steps.
    e   Using standardized administration at the end of an instructional unit is an assessment of
        learning.
    e   Non-standardized administration can also be used for assessments of learning, but results
        should be interpreted cautiously.

Remember that data from an Interim Assessment, whether standardized or non-standardized, is most
useful as an assessment
                      for learning. Interim Assessments can be part of the formative assessment
process to identify students’ learning needs and to guide instructional adjustments.

Each Interim Assessment Block (IAB) or Focused Interim Assessment Block (FIAB) has a corresponding
Interim Connections Playlist (ICP) available in Tools for Teachers.

The Interim Connections Playlist (ICP) includes:
    e   A Performance Progress chart showing Below, At/Near, or Above Standard results for each skill
        assessed.

    e —_ Links to instructional resources created and vetted by teachers to support targeted instruction
         on these skills.

5.1.3 Criteria for Selecting Standardized Test Administration
The criteria for selecting the standardized option for a student are determined locally.

Factors that may impact appropriateness include, but are not necessarily limited to, the extent to which:
    e   The students have been exposed to the test items.

    e   The Interim Assessments    were administered    in a consistent manner   across time.

    e   Educators and others who make inferences based on test results should have received adequate
        training in administering the Interim Assessments, in hand-scoring procedures, and in
        interpreting results.

    e   Astudent with disabilities took the Interim Assessment in a manner consistent with the
        accessibility resources (e.g., accommodations) identified in their respective Individualized
        Education Program (IEP) or Section 504 Plan, and in a manner consistent with how the student
        performs work for their classes.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



       e   Astudent identified as an English learner (EL) took the Interim Assessment with the necessary
           accessibility resources identified for use with statewide assessments.


Table 3 provides several examples of standardized and non-standardized administration of Interim
Assessments.


               Table 3. Examples of Standardized and Non-standardized Administration Practices

                Standardized Administration                         Non-Standardized Administration
    Example 1: A teacher administers the Read             Example 1: A teacher administers the Read
    Informational Texts Interim Assessment Block           Informational Texts Interim Assessment Block
    (IAB) to assess the degree to which students          (IAB) to assess the degree to which students
    learned the emphasized skills at the completion of    learned the emphasized skills at the completion of
    a unit of instruction.                                a unit of instruction, but decides to read the
                                                          stimulus text aloud to control for readability.



    Example 2: A district pilots a new writing program    Example 2: A district pilots   a new writing program
    to improve students’ writing skills. Teachers         to improve students’ writing skills. Teachers
    administer the grade-level ELA performance task
                                                          administer the grade-level ELA performance task
    (PT) Interim Assessment Block (IAB). Teachers
                                                          (PT) Interim Assessment Block (IAB). Teachers
    score the students’ full writes. Teachers score the
                                                          score the students’ full writes, and can instruct
    students’ work and discuss any impact they’ve
    observed in their performance.                        students based on the scoring rubric how to
                                                           revise their writing.




5.2 Guidelines for Administering Interim Assessments in Remote Instructional Environments
Smarter Balanced provides guidance on remote administration of the interim assessments that describes
how teachers can use assessment resources during remote instruction.

ODE provides flexibility to allow teachers to administer and students to take interim assessments
remotely under the following conditions:
e      An authorized employee (e.g., teacher, test administrator) in a school administers the test
       consistent with the district or school policies for in-person interim assessment administration.

e      The test administrator monitors the test activity such that tests are open only for the minimum
       amount of time necessary for students to complete and submit their responses.

e      The test administrator uses established test administration practices to support students accessing
       the interim assessments; this may be a phone call or chat with a parent/guardian in advance of
       starting the test.

e      The test administrator maintains student data privacy with student State-wide Student Identifiers
       (SSID) and other personally identifiable information (PII), which are required to take an
       interim. (e.g., Do not send PII over email, chat, or text or other non-secure transmission methods.
       Please refer to local policies regarding communicating PII.)

e      The test administrator follows state and local policies regarding test security and immediately
       escalates to the test coordinator any suspected item security issue.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



5.3 Test Security
Interim Assessments can serve a variety of educator needs. To better support the range of possible uses
consistent with the Oregon Department of Education policies, educators may establish the timeframe,
administration policies, and local scoring practices for Interim Assessments. The Interim Assessments
are designated as “student- and teacher-facing.” This means educators have the flexibility to access the
test questions and their students’ responses. This flexibility allows educators to use the Interim
Assessments as part of the formative assessment process to improve teaching and learning. Because of
this, Interim Assessments are not intended for accountability purposes.

Interim Assessments are not for public use, display, or distribution. For this reason, any use, display, or
distribution of the Interim Assessments that results in access to individuals beyond authorized
districts and students is strictly prohibited. Finally, Interim Assessment items must not be copied into
third-party systems without permission from Smarter Balanced.

Examples of third-party systems include, but are not limited to:
    e   Google Sites

    e   §=IIluminate

    e   Quizlet

    e   Padlet

    e   PowerSchool
    e   Bitmoji sites

    e   YouTube

5.3.1 Responding to Testing Improprieties, Irregularities, and Breaches
Since interim assessments are not intended to be used for accountability purposes, most testing
improprieties, irregularities, and breaches described in Oregon’s Test Administration Manual are not
reported during an interim assessment administration. Unlike the summative assessments, teachers
may discuss interim test items with students or other educators in the school and may use interim test
items for instructional purposes.


There are two exceptions to this general policy:
    e   Testing Irregularity:   A Test Administrator (TA) accidentally administers   a Summative Assessment
        instead of an Interim Assessment.
    e   Breach: An adult or student shares Interim items publicly.

Incidents that are considered breaches for Interim Assessments include the following:
    e   Any posting of Interim test items or stimuli on social media (e.g., X/Twitter, Facebook, etc.).

    e   Astudent removing from the classroom or testing environment, with or without permission,
        copied or printed test items, stimuli, or scratch paper that was used during the test. This
        includes the use of photocopiers or digital, electronic, or manual devices to record or
        communicate a test item.

    e   An adult or student posting Interim test items in a third-party system (e.g., a student
        information system or local database).
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



    e      An adult displaying or distributing Interim Assessment items that result in access to individuals
           beyond authorized districts and students (e.g., posting on a classroom webpage or putting them
           into a homework packet).

These inappropriate uses of interim items may prevent a teacher from a different school or district from
using an interim assessment for their planned purpose.

A breach incident must be reported to the School Test Coordinator and District Test Coordinator
immediately. The District Test Coordinator is responsible for notifying ODE, which will take the
necessary action(s).


5.4 Accommodations and Accessibility
The interim assessment system is designed so that all students—including those who are learning
English or have special needs—can      participate in the tests and demonstrate what they know and can do.
The interim assessments also include all the accessibility resources that are available in the summative
assessment to provide accurate results for all students. Interim assessment accessibility resources
include:

    e      Universal Tools (e.g., digital notepad, scratch paper) are available to all students based on
           student preference and selection.

    e      Designated Supports (e.g., text-to-speech, translated pop-up glossary) are available to students
           for whom a need has been indicated by an educator or team of educators (along with the
           student and their family) familiar with the student’s instructional needs.
    e      Accommodations (e.g., braille, American Sign Language (ASL) videos) are available to students
           with a documented need noted in an Individualized Education Program (IEP) or Section 504
           Plan.
Refer to the Oregon Accessibility Manual for a full list of accessibility features available for OSAS Interim
Assessments.

5.5 Use of Calculators
The following describes calculator policies for students taking the online interim assessments using
standardized administration procedures. Teachers administering the interim assessments using non-
standardized conditions or for formative purposes may offer students more flexibility regarding the use
of calculators in a way that aligns with their intended use of assessment results.

    e      Anembedded     calculator is available for some mathematics items in Grade 6 and above.
    e      Anon-embedded     calculator may only be used by students with     a documented accommodation
           in an IEP or Section 504 Plan per guidance provided in the Oregon Accessibility Manual. The
           non-embedded calculator should have no internet or wireless connectivity, and all security
           procedures need to be followed.
    e      Interim mathematics assessments for grades 3—5 do not allow calculators to be used, even as an
           accommodation.
    e      The mathematics ICAs for grades 6 through high school are divided into two sections: Calculator
           Available and Calculator Not Available. Some grade-level mathematics IABs have a calculator
           available, and others do not, depending upon assessed content.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



    e   The types of embedded calculators available on the interim mathematics tests are described
        below.
        o      Grade 6: Basic Calculator
        o      Grades 7 and 8: Scientific Calculator
        o      High School: Scientific, Graphing, & Regression Calculator

5.6 Electronic Devices
For standardized test administration conditions, students should only have what is needed and allowed
for testing, unless a device is needed for medical monitoring as described in the Oregon Accessibility
Manual. All other student belongings should be placed in the location identified by the Test
Administrator.


For standardized and non-standardized test administrations, no digital, electronic, or manual device may
be used to record or retain test items or stimuli (reading passages). Similarly, these materials may not be
shared using email, social media websites, etc. Interim assessments are “student- and teacher-facing”
only, which is consistent with the information provided in Section 5.3 Test Security.

5.7 Scratch Paper

Scratch Paper Use
Scratch paper is a non-embedded       universal tool for students to take notes, write computations, or
develop draft responses. Scratch paper should be available to students for all of the Interim
Assessments.
    e   For ELA, only plain paper or lined paper is appropriate.
    e   For math, plain graph paper (no coordinate plane or other graphics) may be used at any grade
        level and is required beginning in sixth grade.
    e   Awhiteboard with a marker may also be used as scratch paper.
As long as the construct being measured is not impacted, assistive technology devices, including low-
tech assistive technology (e.g., Math Window), are permitted to make notes, including the use of digital
graph paper.
    e   The assistive technology devices need to be familiar to the student and/or consistent with their
        Individualized Education Program (IEP) or Section 504 Plan.
    e   Access to the internet must be disabled on assistive technology devices.

Storage and Security
For a standardized Interim Assessment administration, teachers must either destroy scratch paper or
securely store it after each test session. This includes when students take notes and/or draft responses
to ELA or math performance tasks (PTs).

For the ELA Interim Assessment Block (IAB) — Performance Task (PT), the notes on the embedded
universal tool, Global Notes, are retained from Part 1 to Part 2. This allows students to return to their
notes, even though they are not able to go back to specific items in Part 1. While the embedded Global
Notes is the preferred mode for notetaking during the ELA performance task (PT), students may use
scratch paper to make notes, create graphic organizers, or develop draft responses.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



To maintain security, teachers should have students write their names (or other identifiers) on scratch
paper used for notes on performance tasks (PTs). The teacher must collect and securely store the
scratch paper if it will be used in a later test session. All scratch paper must be securely destroyed or
stored after the student completes the performance tasks (PTs), following protocols similar to the
Summative Assessment.

Instructional Use
Work that students do on scratch paper for Interim Assessments may contribute to classroom
discussions (e.g., compare first drafts to later versions of a writing response). It may also help inform the
teacher’s next steps in instruction or be used in a Professional Learning Community (PLC) within the
school environment. In all cases, the scratch paper must be kept securely and should be
destroyed/shredded when the instructional use ends.

5.8 Breaks
There is no limit on the number of breaks or the length of a break that a student may be given according
to his or her unique needs. However, for some portions of the test, breaks of more than 20 minutes will
prevent the student from returning to items already attempted by the student. If the test is paused for
more than 20 minutes, the student will not be able to go back to items on the previous screens. A single
test session should not include a break longer than 20 minutes. Instead, separate test sessions should be
scheduled around extended breaks (e.g., lunch).


For a performance task (PT), the student can take a break for any amount of time and still return to any
previously answered item within the performance task’s (PTs) current segment only.
e   The math performance tasks (PT) have only one part.
e   The ELA performance tasks (PTs) are presented in two parts.
e   Students can take breaks within Parts 1 and 2; however, once a student moves from Part 1 to Part 2,
    they will not be able to review or revise items in Part 1.
e   ODE recommends that students complete Part 1 in one test session and Part 2 the next school day in
    a separate test session.

5.9 Verbal Instructions/Script
The purpose of the interim assessments is to provide educators with student- and class-level results that
can be used to inform instruction. To support the intended flexibility of the assessments, a standard
verbal script is not required. For a standardized administration, TAs may use the scripts and directions
provided for the summative assessments in Oregon’s Test Administration Manual.



Section 6.0: Viewing Scores and Results
Following the administration and scoring of the interim assessments, results will be available in the
Centralized Reporting System (CRS). For detailed information on CRS, please consult the Reporting
System User Guide. For interim assessments with items that are all machine-scored, student results are
generally available within a few minutes after the test is completed and uploaded to the Centralized
Reporting System. For interim assessments that require hand scoring, the hand-scored items must be
scored locally and submitted. Both parts—machine and hand-scored responses—must be scored and
the results submitted to the reporting system to receive a score for the assessment.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



6.1       Hand Scoring for Constructed Response Items
It is recommended that educators participate in hand-scoring training as part of professional
development to better understand the expectations for student learning and how items are scored for
summative testing. Training materials and scoring guides are located within each IAB and Focused IAB
that include constructed-response items, as well as on the Test Development page of the Smarter
Content Explorer.

6.2.     | Understanding Results for the Interim Assessments
Results from the interim assessments include scale scores and an error band, as described below. See
the Oregon Guide to Analyze Interim Results for more information.

6.2.1.    Group-Level Results
Group-level results can help educators evaluate the degree to which they may need to adjust their
instruction by analyzing in which areas students are excelling and for which they may need additional
support.

6.2.2.    Student-Level Results
Student-level results provide a roster of students with each student’s overall performance on a selected
IAB or FIAB.

6.2.3.    Item-Level Results
ltem-level results provide student responses to test questions and enable educators to evaluate any
patterns in responses by looking at which items the group did well on and on which items they
struggled. The item-level view for an individual student shows the claim, target, item difficulty, standard,
the maximum score, and the student’s score for the item.

6.2.4.    Item Distractor Analysis
The Item Analysis report allows educators to view distractor information by item for their group of
students. For multiple-choice items, this report shows the distribution of students who selected each
answer option, with the correct answer indicated. For all other item types, it displays the distribution of
points earned.

6.3.     | Reporting Performance for IABs and Focused IABs
Based on a student’s individual scale score and the error band, student results for IABs and Focused IABs
are reported as one of three reporting categories: Above Standard, Near Standard, or Below Standard.
Each reporting category represents a range of scale scores. A student score distribution by reporting
category is also provided for group-level reporting, providing educators with the proportion of students
who performed within each reporting category.


Section 7.0: Viewing Scores and Results


Following the administration and scoring of the Interim Assessments, results will be available in the
Centralized Reporting System (CRS). For detailed information on CRS, please consult the Reporting
System User Guide.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



7.1           Centralized Reporting System Overview
The Centralized Reporting System (CRS) is a secure, web-based platform that provides timely, detailed
reports on student performance for both Summative and Interim Assessments. Authorized users,
including teachers, school administrators, and district staff, can use the Centralized Reporting System
(CRS) to support instructional planning and track student achievement over time.


Centralized Reporting System (CRS) to reports are organized into four main types:
          e    Aggregate-Level Results
          e    Group-Level Results
          e    Student-Level Results
          e     ltem-Level Results

Access to the Centralized Reporting System (CRS) is role-based, meaning users can only see the data that
matches their responsibilities. For more information regarding the Centralized Reporting System (CRS),
please reference the Centralized Reporting System User Guide.      The Centralized Reporting System (CRS)
also includes direct links to instructional resources in Tools for Teachers and Interim Connections
Playlists.

For more information, see the Reporting System User Guide.

7.1.1         Aggregate-Level Results
Aggregate reports show overall trends in student performance across large groups, such as schools,
districts, or grade levels. These reports can help identify strengths, gaps, and long-term trends to inform
curriculum decisions and professional learning.

Educators can use aggregate-level results to:

      e       Monitor performance across different student groups and demographic subgroups.
      e       Compare results over time to measure growth.
      e       Export data as CSV files for further analysis.

Below is a brief description of each level of results, but for more information, please see the Oregon
Guide to Analyze Interim Results.

7.1.2         Group-Level Results
Group-level reports focus on smaller sets of students, such as a class or an instructional group. These
reports help teachers and administrators see how groups are performing in relation to the content
standards.

The Centralized Reporting System (CRS) provides group-level results for Assessment Blocks (IABs), and
Focused Interim Assessment Blocks (FIABs). Results can be viewed in different ways depending on the
assessment type.

Common report features include:
      e       Average scale scores for the group
      e       Performance distributions showing how many students are Below, At/Near, or Above Standard
      e       Score distribution charts by item
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide




Groups can be:
    e   Assigned Groups: Created by the district or school and uploaded to the Centralized Reporting
        System (CRS).
    e   Custom Groups: Created by educators within the Centralized Reporting System (CRS) to monitor
        specific students.

The Interim Assessment Dashboard summarizes Interim Assessment Blocks (IABs) and Focused Interim
Assessment Blocks (FIABs) activity across the year and helps teachers select assessments to generate
detailed reports.

7.1.3   Student-Level Results
Student-level reports provide detailed information about individual student performance.

These reports include:
    e   Overall scores and achievement levels
    e   Results for each claim or target
    e   Historical performance over multiple years

Educators can use student-level results to:
    e   Support goal setting with students
    e   Communicate       progress with families/caregivers
    e   Plan targeted instruction



Reports are available in several formats, including:
    e   Individual Student Report (ISR): Summarizes a student’s assessment results in a printable PDF
    e   District/School Exports: Allow schools and districts to export student-level data for analysis

7.1.4   Item-Level Results
ltem-level reports display information about how students responded to each test question. These
reports help educators identify patterns and address learning gaps.

ltem-level results include:
        ltem-level data
        Access to the items themselves
        Access to student responses to the items
    e    Test results for adaptive assessments include item-level data only on the individual student
        level

Teachers can use item-level results to:
    e   Analyze which questions were most challenging
    e   See common       misconceptions
    e   Plan follow-up instruction
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



7.2     Links to the Interim Connections Playlists
The Centralized Reporting System (CRS) includes Instructional Resource (lessons) links designed to help
educators use Interim Assessment Blocks (IAB/FIABs) data for targeted, next-step instructional
strategies. These resources were created by expert educators and reviewed by Smarter Balanced.



The Interim Connections Playlists (ICPs) link student performance on the Interim Assessment Blocks
(IABs) and Focused Interim Assessment Blocks (FIABs) to resources in Tools for Teachers. The playlists
and the linked instructional lessons are designed to support the skills and concepts measured on the
Interim Assessments. They also help educators differentiate instruction based on specific performance
descriptors (Below Standard, Near Standard, Above Standard).

Educators can access Interim Connections Playlists (ICPs) through the Features and Tools button and
selecting the “Get Instructional Resources” link in the Centralized Reporting System or directly through
Tools for Teachers.

A sample Grade 4 Math - Geometry Connections Playlist is available publicly; however, access to the
instructional resources requires a Tools for Teachers login that is available to educators in subscribing
states and territories in accordance with ODE policy.

                       Figure 3. Connections Playlist for Grade   4 Math — Geometry

This image of the Interim Connections Playlist (ICP) for Grade    4 Math — Geometry shows the
Instructional Resource available within Tools for Teachers. The first callout shows student performance
in relation to the three reporting categories: Below, At/Near, and Above, and the second callout details
the available resources. The third callout offers some suggestions for intervention, and the final callout
lists some things that teachers may consider around this instructional unit.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



  -+¢     Connect               Student            Performance                      to Instructional                     Resources           ©
                                                             STUDENT         PERFORMANCE       PROGRESSIONS       ©

                       Topic
          @)                       =» Below                                     § Near                            J Above           @
                    Resource


                  Symmetry      — Recognize all lines of symmetry in            Know and draw line(s)             Identify if a shape has
              Future resource   | Unfamiliar two-dimensional figures.           including vertical, horizontal,   _line(s) of symmetry
                                                                                diagonal of symmetry for          and explain why.
                                                                                regular and irregular two-
                                                                                dimensional polygons.

          Property of Angles    = Know aright triangle has       a90 degree     Recognize right triangles asa     Know howto find and
          Angles Around Us> _     (right) angle, visually determine angles      category.                         rotate a right triangle.
                                  <, > 90 degrees, and able to define
                                  and labeling conventions of angles
                                  (acute, right, obtuse)

        Creating aGeometric       —_|dentify points, lines, line segments,      Classify two- dimensional         Know how to rotate a
                         ae       rays, angles (right, acute, obtuse), and _ figures based on parallel or         right triangle.
         Creating a Geometric     perpendicular and parallel lines in           perpendicular lines or angles
                       Map _      two- dimensional figures.                     of specified lines.




  ©       Suggestions for Intervention © 3]
         For students who are significantly below, search for resources related to the following skills:

             e Use of manipulatives as concrete examples.
             e Visual representations.
             e Working with tools (protractors, rulers) that support precision.




  ©      Things To Consider @
             e Focus centers around students drawing with precision, classifying and comparing two-dimensional shapes.
             ¢ Connect the vocabulary and content to the spatial relationships.
             e Classifying two-dimensional figures based on angles, parallel and perpendicular lines.
             ¢ Connect between prior knowledge of shapes to include the focus on angles, parallel and perpendicular lines
               or the absence of (ex: triangle vs. right triangle).
             e Identify lines of symmetry and line-symmetric two-dimensional shapes.




Section 8.0: Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP)
This section provides guidance regarding educator use of the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP). It
includes options and ideas for the use of the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) during instruction.
The Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) is a permission-based resource that authenticated educators
can access via Tools for Teachers.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



8.1 Purpose of the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP)
The Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) provides educators with the ability to use Interim Assessment
items in more flexible ways that support student learning using the formative assessment process. The
Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) includes all live items on the available Interim Assessment Blocks
(IABs), and Focused Interim Assessment Blocks (FIABs).

The Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) may be used by educators to view and select or deselect
individual assessment items to tailor content covered by an Interim Assessment, so it better aligns with
the sequence of their instruction. Educators may use the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) in
addition to the fixed form Interim Assessment Blocks (IABs), and Focused Interim Assessment Blocks
(FIABs) for remote and in-person instruction. The Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) is available for
integration into Tools for Teachers.


8.2 Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) Features
With similar functionality to the Sample Items Website, the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) allows
educators to:
      e = Easily find, access, display, and export relevant Interim Assessment items via a search
          by test name, grade, claim, target, and standard,
      e    Generate answer keys for use by teachers,
      e    View and discuss individual items and answers with students or teacher teams, and/or
      e    Select items to create a PDF for download and print for use with students.



8.3 Test Security
The Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP), like the OSAS Interim Assessments, can serve a variety of
educator needs. The security considerations for Interim Assessments described in Section 5.4 Test
Security also apply to the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP).

Interim Assessment items downloaded from the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) are not for public
use, display, or distribution. For more information on the test security requirements, see Section 5.4
Test Security.

Interim Assessment items and scoring rubrics that are printed for student use are subject to the same
test security protocols as printed Summative Assessment items. Printed Interim Assessment items,
passages, and scoring rubrics, including embossed   braille printouts, must be collected and securely
stored when they are not in use for instruction. Upon completion of their use for instruction, the printed
materials must be securely destroyed.


8.4 Accessibility Resources
Educators using the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) may select an item to display as it appears in
an online Interim Assessment, including all embedded accessibility resources available for that item.
When an item is selected for download to a PDF for printing, the embedded accessibility resources
available for the item are limited to:
      e    Universal Tools—English Glossary
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



      e   Designated Supports — math only: Dual Language Spanish Full Translation, Translation
          Glossary, and Illustration Glossary
      e   Accommodations—braille files


In addition to the above resources, educators may allow students to use the non-embedded accessibility
resources described in the Oregon Accessibility Manual.

8.5 Using the Interim Assessment Item Portal
It’s important to note that OSAS Interim Assessment content is protected under copyright and is subject
to the provisions of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA). Follow the acceptable use guidelines
for using Interim Assessments in your local contexts. Reminder: the Interim Assessment items should
remain non-public as they are designated as “student- and teacher-facing.”

The Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) offers flexible ways to access the Interim Assessment items in
a variety of ways. This section provides some examples of these flexible uses.

    Table 4. Example Scenarios for Non-standardized Use of Interim Assessment Items in the Interim
                                        Assessment Item Portal

 Quick Check — Single Item Use
 The teacher uses the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) to access a single Interim Assessment item for use
 with students. The teacher displays the item and reads the item aloud to students. Quick responses can be
 collected orally, on dry erase boards, or via student scratch paper.


 Quick Checks can be used as an entrance or an exit ticket or during instruction to elicit evidence and dive
 deeper into student thinking. This use of items in the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) offers a quick
 snapshot of how well the instruction is preparing students to respond to a specific item type, Target, and
 content standard. These quick checks can alert teachers when their curriculum is not supporting a particular
 skill with the requisite rigor, or when the language of instruction, and the language of assessment are
 misaligned. The immediate collection of responses provides opportunities to inquire about student thinking in
 real time and provides actionable data for instructional next steps and student learning strategies. These next
 steps and learning strategies can be strategically applied.


 Student accessibility needs and preferences should be considered with each individual item used in the Interim
 Assessment Item Portal (IAIP). For example, when displaying an item visually in class, a teacher can access and
 display the American Sign Language (ASL) video for students, or a student paper copy can be generated and
 magnified for a student with a visual impairment who may have difficulty accessing item content when it is
 displayed in a classroom environment. Knowing student needs and preferences will help teachers select
 instructional accessibility strategies for individual item use.


 Considerations for Use of the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) for Remote Administration
 A variety of technology platforms can be utilized to encourage a productive and efficient exchange between the
 student and educator when reviewing Interim items in a remote environment. The platform selected should
 allow the educator to display the item securely, provide an environment where the student has an appropriate
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



 Quick Check — Single Item Use
 amount of time to consider how they will answer the item and why, and include audio, chat, and other features
 that encourage formative feedback and allow the student and educator to communicate directly and in real
 time. These considerations also hold true for the “Instructional Activity — Single to Multiple Item Use”.


 Instructional Activity — Single to Multiple Item Use
 The teacher uses the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) to access Interim Assessment items for use with
 students. The teacher selects either a single item or multiple items for an activity that will be used during
 instruction. Instructional activities can vary from classroom to classroom. For example, a single item can be used
 and displayed or printed while partners or teams work together to discuss their thinking and answer the item.


 Think-Pair-Share is a strategy a teacher can use for formative assessment by observing student discussions and
 eliciting student responses. Other options include having students self-select or participate in assigned teams to
 discuss the item and share their thinking by presenting their responses to the class. In math, the “number talks”
 strategy may be used with Interim items as an instructional activity.


 Using items for an instructional activity affords teachers an opportunity to model a concept and then observe
 student critical thinking in real time with an item. This affords the opportunity for teachers to interpret and act
 on misconceptions students may have with a specific item type, Target, or content standard. The activity
 approach to elicit student responses provides opportunities for students to work together and to share their
 thinking as well as hear the thinking of their peers. Descriptive feedback can be given and applied immediately.


 Student accessibility needs and preferences should be considered when using items from the Interim
 Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) instructionally with students. For example, when displaying an item visually in
 class,   a teacher can magnify the item and model the use of the color contrast options for students who use
 these designated supports. When     using math items, providing the illustration glossaries for the items can
 support students’ understanding of item content. Knowing student needs and preferences will help teachers
 select needed instructional accessibility strategies when using the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) items
 for an instructional activity.

 Understanding Scoring — Short Answer and Performance Tasks (PTs)
 The teacher uses the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) to display a short answer Interim Assessment item
 to students. The teacher elicits student responses via an entrance or exit ticket,   a dry erase board, or other
 writing tool. The teacher then selects the “About this Item” button to access the scoring rubric for the item. The
 scoring rubric describes the rationale for each possible score point.


 The teacher can also display sample student responses that are available in the secure teacher hand-scoring
 materials for Interim Assessments, in the OSAS Portal. The teacher may also create their own sample student
 responses using student responses with personally identifiable information redacted. Teachers can have
 students use the rubric to score the sample responses to calibrate student understanding of the rubric. Students
 can also use the scoring rubric to evaluate their own responses and as they work with partners or teams to
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



 Quick Check — Single Item Use
 provide descriptive peer feedback. Understanding scoring rubrics can help students and teachers identify
 student performance gaps and provide guidance on learning goals.


 The Smarter Annotated Response Tool (SmART) provides sample student responses for released Smarter
 Balanced Practice Test items that may be used to support student understanding of scoring rubrics.


 Student accessibility needs and preferences should be considered when using scoring rubrics with students. For
 example, when using rubrics with students, printing a copy for each student to reference can provide support.
 Additional considerations for using line readers, highlighters, glossaries, and magnification may also be
 considered when sharing and using rubrics with students.


 Considerations for Use of the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) for Remote Administration
 Publicly available scoring rubrics can be used to support administration in remote environments and are
 available in the new Smarter Annotated Response Tool (SmART) and the Smarter Content Explorer.


 Administering Interim Assessments in Paper-and-Pencil Forms — Printing Out Interim Assessment Items for In-
 Person Instruction Only
 The teacher wants to administer an Interim Assessment to students; however, the teacher does not have access
 to a computer lab or devices for administering via computer. The teacher can access the Interim Assessment
 items in the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP), select all items in an assessment, and print them to a PDF.
 The teacher can then administer the Interim Assessment on paper to students. Student accessibility resources
 such as braille files, Soanish translation (math only), and English glossaries are also included in the printout. The
 teacher also prints the Answer Key/Rubric for each item and uses them to score the student responses.


 The teacher should securely store the printed Interim Assessment items, passages, answer key, and scoring
 rubrics, including embossed braille printouts when they are not in use for instruction and securely destroy them
 upon completion of their use.


 Tips and Considerations for Practice: The Reporting System does not allow for entering Interim Assessment
 results from assessments administered in this manner, so student results will not appear in the Student's Test
 History.


 Considerations for Use of the Interim Assessment Item Portal (IAIP) for Remote Administration
 Due to potential item security risks, this scenario is not applicable for remote administration.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide




Section 9.0: Oregon Tools for Teachers Overview

9.1 Smarter Balanced Tools for Teachers Overview



The Tools for Teachers website is an online collection of instructional and professional learning
resources. These resources are aligned with the ELA and math state content standards and help
educators implement the formative assessment process with targeted instruction to improve teaching
and learning. Tools for Teachers was developed by educators for educators and provides a variety of
resources, including:

    e   Instructional Resources developed by educators through a collaborative development approach
        and a quality review process utilizing a set of consistent criteria.
    e   Formative Assessment strategies teachers can use to add to the instructional toolkit for
        establishing routines that engage students, check understanding, and allow real-time
        educational actions.
    e   Accessibility Strategies embedded     elements within Instructional Resources (e.g., lessons)
        necessary to enhance instructional approaches that address the needs of all learners, including
        the inclusion of tiered accessibility supports.
    e   Interim Connections Playlists (ICPs) are aligned to Interim Assessments and provide educators
        with information on performance to inform differentiation as well as lessons to target skills and
        concepts.
    e   Professional Learning Resources focus on how Tools for Teachers resources can support
        assessment literacy, deep understanding of ELA and math state content standards, and much
        more.


Tools for Teachers includes several innovative design features that make it teacher-friendly. Search
features help educators locate Instructional Resources (i.e., lessons) that can be bookmarked and
annotated with the “notes” feature. Instructional Resources (lessons) can also be printed and shared
including printing and sharing the activity with students. In addition, it is web accessible (i.e., WCAG   2.1
AA compliant).

Instructional Resources (lessons) include options for differentiating instruction, as well as student-
focused accessibility strategies, and formative assessment strategies, and additional support for ELs. For
more information about Tools for Teachers, see the Get Started page.

The Tools for Teachers website is embedded with help features.

Additional information about Instructional Resources is available on the Tools for Teachers page.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



9.2 Accessing Tools for Teachers
Tools for Teachers is available to educators in states/territories or school districts that are members of
Smarter Balanced. Oregon Department of Education may also provide higher education faculty with
access to the platform. Oregon Department of Education, or their service providers, are responsible for
working directly with districts and institutions of higher education to set up user accounts and to
provide help desk support. (Service providers may add information about educator access to Tools for
Teachers.)
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



Appendix A: Additional resources
The following resources provide additional information about the OSAS interim assessments.

 Resource                 Description

 Interim Assessment       Provides an overview of the Interim Assessment Blocks (IABs) and Focused
 Overview Catalog         IABs, describes key features of the assessments, and provides annual
                          updates

 OSAS Portal              Practice tests are available for ELA and mathematics for all tested grades.
                          They are similar in format and structure to the actual test and include about
                          20 questions based on similar but abbreviated content as the summative
                          test. Practice Tests include Performance Tasks for each grade.

                          Training tests are shorter than practice tests and offer a sample of six
                          questions, so students can become familiar with the testing software.
 Sample Items Website   | Provides examples of test questions used on OSAS assessments in English
                          language arts/literacy and mathematics. Sample items are not intended to
                          be used as practice tests, but educators can use them to better understand
                          how Oregon measures college- and career-ready content standards.

 Smarter Content          Describes how Oregon assesses academic standards. Educators can use it to
 Explorer                 support instruction, interpret student results, and plan activities aligned to
                          grade-level claims and targets

 Oregon Accessibility     Describes the Oregon universal tools, designated supports, and
 Manual                   accommodations available for the OSAS interim assessments. The guidelines
                          provide information for classroom teachers, English language development
                          educators, special education teachers, and related services personnel to use
                          in selecting and administering universal tools, designated supports, and
                          accommodations for those students who need them.
 Tools for Teachers       See the video on the homepage for a brief overview of the types of tools
                          and resources available within Tools for Teachers.


 Tools for Teachers       This is a two-page quick guide on using the Tools for Teachers resources and
 Overview                 strategies.
2025-26 Interim Assessment Guide



 Resource                  Description

 Tools for Teachers        This 7-minute video introduces the Smarter Balanced Tools for Teachers
 Video Introduction        website. Tools for Teachers offers educator-created lessons, activities,
                           strategies, and professional development to support tailored instruction
                           and boost learning. The video provides site navigation tips, examples of how
                           educators can use the platform, and a deeper look at Tools for Teachers’s
                           instructional resources. It also highlights how to incorporate formative
                           assessment into classroom practice.

 Using Smarter             This 6:53-minute video provides an introduction to the Smarter Balanced
 Balanced Interim          Interim Connections Playlist, describing what playlists are and tips for how
 Connections Playlists   | to use them. The video walks through three different scenarios of how
(ICPs)                     educators can use playlists to support teaching and learning.
