                                                 yy Oregon Department
                                                    of Human Services




Oregon Eligibility Partnership (OEP)
Update for the Joint Committee on
Information. Management and Technology

Nate Singer,-Director, Oregon Eligibility Partnership
september 2022
Agenda
1. Oregon Department of Human Services priorities and how the Oregon Eligibility
Partnership contributes

2. Fast facts about the ONE system

3. Procurement update

4. Policy Option Package overview

5. Challenges to ONE system stabilization
Supporting well-being across the lifespan
                      eee      Oregon Eligibility Partnership     =

   Child Welfare

           Self-Sufficiency Programs

                        Vocational   Rehabilitation
                       a


           Office of Developmental Disabilities Services
   eS


                             Aging and People with Disabilities


   Birth                      Adulthood                               Final stages of life
Building well-being in Oregon
Everyone in Oregon deserves an opportunity to build well-being, reach their potential,
and fully contribute to their communities.

ODHS serves more than 1 in 3 Oregonians
and is well positioned to benefit entire
communities — if we can redesign a human
services system that has long legacies of racial
and economic inequity and a piecemeal service
network that leaves many behind.

Our job is to partner with communities and
dismantle these barriers so that everyone in
Oregon can access the supports they need to thrive.
Advancing a profound culture change
            Where    we've    been                          Where we're headed



                                                                    ot
                    v.




                         NY
                    Im
People trapped by regulation                    People free to pursue goals
Agencies determine what's best for              People and community are the experts in their
the community and people.                       own lives.

lf the need isn’t prescribed by agency rules,   Staff guide people through paperwork, go to
Staff say “no” or pass the individual on to     clients, do the legwork to find supports.
someone else.
                                                People, not regulations, are at the center of
Regulations are at the center of decisions      decisions and services are tailored to their
and services are one-size-fits-all.                needs.

                                                     Building Well-being Together
How we’re getting there: Three agency-wide priorities


                                                    0
         rf                                        aD
        ——                                     =
      Strengthening                             Creating
     our foundations                          the future of
                                            human services

      to serve people    from COVID-19      through community-
       more equitably     to wildfires to    driven solutions to
       and effectively     earthquakes      systemic oppression
ONE system technology working as designed




NRA AR ARS it                                                    3S          300,000
                                                                                         i
     Unplanned     Average screen   Number of other         Percent of        Cases where
  system outages      load time      IT systems that    referrals fromthe    COLA updates
                                       interface with         federal       were automated
                                            ONE            marketplace
                                                        automated end-
                                                            to-end
Better access, convenience for Oregonians




“RASA                          RR              erin                                            ai
 1.5 Million             1 Million           749,000                 43            $2 Billion
  1 in 3 people in        Applications     People using the     Percentage of     Amount of SNAP
    Oregon are         processed since      ONE Applicant      cases receiving    food benefits sent
  served through          go-live; 44%           Portal       multiple benefits     to people since
 the ONE system      — submitted online                       through the ONE            go-live
                       through the ONE                             system
                        Applicant Portal
Procurement update
Closed Request for Proposals for ONE system technology and infrastructure, application
development and security services
Currently negotiating the Statement of Work with Deloitte
Spans July 2023 through June 2027
Contract includes three service bundles
 ¢ Application development for system enhancements, fixes and refinements
 ¢ Technology and infrastructure support for system monitoring, reporting, and patch and platform
   software installations
 ¢ Security services for system security planning, assessment and compliance
Policy Option Package: ONE maintenance & operation
To ensure that the ONE system can be improved and expanded to meet the ever-
changing needs of Oregonians and programs they rely on, the ONE system must
continue evolving. Oregon Eligibility Partnership seeks funding to sustain and grow
the ONE system. Doing so will help:

¢ Support ongoing maintenance and operations of the ONE
  system

¢ Advance integration for better, more equitable access to
  health, food, cash, childcare and other benefits

¢ Enable system modifications to meet the needs of users

¢ Close-out the successful Integrated Eligibility Project, the        »       @
  state's largest IT project
Policy Option Package: IT mainframe
To ensure that Oregonians continue to receive benefits and payments without
interruption, Oregon Eligibility Partnership seeks to phase out the mainframe
systems. Doing so will help:

¢ Avoid the risk of service breakdowns caused by
  old software.
¢ Bring ODHS technology into alignment with peer
  agencies and improve flow across interfacing
  information systems.

¢ Allow Oregon to achieve full benefit from its
  investments in the ONE system.


                                                                                11
Replacing aging technology
Replacement will address fundamental, long-term issues
over three phases

  Multi-biennia effort




                                                         O
  $50 million request for 2023-25 budget

  New positions to support the work
     o 19 OIS positions
     o 10 ODHS positions
     o 2 OHA positions

  Potential savings of $6 million per year

                                                             12
Challenges to system stabilization




      Technology                     Public Health
       additions                      Emergency




                                                     13
             yy Oregon   Department
                of Human Services




Questions?
