            2025 Oregon QAP




           -

            OREGON    HOUSING      and
            COMMUNITY      SERVICES




       State of Oregon
  Qualified Allocation Plan
For Low Income Housing Tax Credits
                Version   2025.1
                                           2025 Oregon QAP



                                       Approval of the State of Oregon
                                   2025 Updated Qualified Allocation Plan
                                  Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program


     |, Tina Kotek, Governor of the State of Oregon, do hereby approve for implementation the 2025
 Updated Qualified Allocation Plan that governs the federal Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program, as
  presented to me by the Oregon Housing and Community Services Department under the provisions of
                 IRC Section 42, Executive Order EO-87-06 and OAR Chapter 813, Division 90.


       Of ta — [CAE                                                          2/25/25
The Honorable Tina Kotek, Governor of Oregon                          Date




                                                    EQUAL HOUSING
                                                    OPPORTUNITY




    Oregon Housing and Community Services does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, creed,
  national origin, sex, religion, marital status, status with regard to public assistance, disability, familial
                  status, gender identity, or sexual orientation in the provision of services.

                                       An equal opportunity employer.

                  Information will be made available in alternative format upon request.
                                                                2025 Oregon QAP



Table of Contents
INTFOCUCTION 0.                      cee cee eeeeeeseensneaee nee ceeeeeeeeeeeeeeees aaa aaaaaeaeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeseessaaaaaaaaaaaaeaeaseseeeeeeeeenenesaaaaaaeaaeseaeaegs 1
Credit OVErViQWw.........            ccc ceceeceeeeeeeenennaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesaaaaaaaaeaeeeeeeeeseeees
                                                                                   ena asaaaaaaaaaeaeeaeaeeeeeeeeeeneeaaaaaaaaas 3
    4% Low-Income Housing Tax Credits............ccccccccsscsscssssssesesesesseesseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeseeeeeseeaeeaseanaaaaaaaeaaes 3

    9% Low-Income Housing Tax Credits ............ccccccccccccccceceeceseeneeensensseeeeeessseseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeseeseeneeas 3

    Determination of Credit AMOUNL...............cccccccceessesseneeceeeesesaaeeceeeesesaaaeeeeesesaaaaeeeeessssaaaeeeeeeneesaaaeseeenenaaas 3

Applying for Credits.............ccccccccccccccccccccscsesesesseseeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeee
                                                          ee eaeaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeees eu eee seeeeeessaaAAEEGEEEEEEEEEEEA SHEE 5
    Project CHArges...........cccccccccccccsensesneeenneeneeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
                                                                          eee eAeAAAAA AAA AAA HAHAHA EEEEEEEEEEEEDEEEEEEEEEEEES 5

    LIHTC Allocation Application Process .................cccccccccseeeeeeeeeeceeeeeceeeeeseeeeeseeseeaeeaseeseaaeaaeeassssnesseeeeeeserenerees 5

    Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 (HERA) Basis BOOst....................:::::0::ssseesseeseeseeeeeeeneeseeess 7

    Returned / Unused LIHTC Allocation Authority ................ccccccccccssccsssssccecesseeseesssseeessesseeecesaeesesssseeenseaees 8
    Re-evaluation Of Reservation ..............:.ccccccssscsceeecesssseceeeeesessaeeeeeeeeeseaeaeeeeeesssaaaeceeeeesesaaeaesseseesaaaeseeeneniaas 8

    Agency authority to use GiSCretion..............cccccccccseessesnsesessesesesseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeeeeeseeeeeeeeseeseeneeaeeaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaes 8

Project Selection Proce. ............cccccsscssessseessesseeseeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeaaeaaeaaa
                                                                                               aaa ea ssa sEEEEESEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEES 9

    Private Activity Bonds and 4% Low-Income Housing Tax Credits ...............::::csssssssssseseeseessesseeeeeeseeeeeeees 9

    9% Low-Income HOUSING Tax Credits ...........cccccccccccccceceeceeeeaneenseeseesseseesseesseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeceseeeseeseeneeaaeaas 12

Programmatic REQUIFEMENEHS .............:.cccccccccccceeeeeseseeeeceeeee
                                             eee eeeeeeeeeceeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaasaaeeeeeeeeeaaaaaeeeeeeeeeaaaaaaeeeeees 18

    Minimum            Requirements for LIHTC Projects................ccccssscscccscccccccsceesesssssnsseseeceeeeeeeecesesesesessensaasaeesenens 18

    LIHTC Reservation Requirements ..............:cccccssssssesececeeceeseeeeeeeceeaeesseeeeeeeeeeassaaseeeeeeesesaaaaaaeeeeseeseeuaaaaaees 21

    Carryover Allocation Requirements (9% LIHTC Specific) .............c.ccccccccccccecssesessssssenseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeneeees 22
    Exchange of 9% Credit Award for Subsequent Years Credit Allocation .....................:ccccccsceeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 23
    Placed-In-Service Allocation REQuireMents ..............ccccccccecceccccceeceeceeeeeceeseesaeaaseaseaseaaesseseseeeeeeeteseeseeeegs 23

    Project CHANGES ............cccccccccseceesnenneeneeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeaae
                                                                                aaa aaa GAA AGG AGH EEEEEEEEEEEEEREEEEEEESEESEEEAS 24

    Cost Savings ClauSe ..............ccccceccesceeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeaaeaaeeaaeaaaeaa
                                                                    eee euassdsEESEEOEEEDEEEEEEEEEESEESEESeeseeneeneaaaaaas 24

    Project Transfer or Assignment Requiring OHCS Consent..................ccccscsssssssececeeceeeeseeseeesessessnaaeasenens 25

    Process and Requirement for Obtaining OHCS Consent..................ccccccsssssscsesseceeceeceseessessesssssnaaeeseeens 25
    CONStrUCTION CIOSING ..............cccccccccececeeeeeeeeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeaaeaaeeae
                                                            saa sea AAA sEESEEEEEEDEEDEEEEEEEAESeeseeseeneaaaeaaaaaaaaaaaaa 25

    Market Study ..........ccccccccccccccsecsesseeseeaneeneeen
                                eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeas eas sad AHH EEEEEEEEEDEEEEEEDEEEEREEEEEEEES 26

COMSIGErAatTIONS..........        eee             cee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee naa aaeaeeeeeeeeeeee eee eee nes aaaaaaaaAaeA eee eee eee ee ens a aaa AGA GAAAAA AAA CAR eee eEE EE Ee Ee ooo 26
    Reservation Of Right ................cccccsssscssececcccceceecesceeseeeessnsaaeaeeseeeeeeeesseeseeeessasaaeaeeseeeeeseeeesessesessasaasaeenenens 26
    Documentation Of Discretion.................:ccccccessecceceeeesessneceeeeeseseaaaeeeeeensaaaeceeeessesaaeaeeeesessaaaeeseeenseaaeeeenens 27

    Policy on Exceptions/Waiver REQUESES ..............cccccccccssssccsssssccecesseesesessseeceeeseeescesseeeeceseseeessesaeeseseaseeeeses 27
                                                           2025 Oregon QAP


   Partial INValidity ..........cccccecteseesseeneeeneeseeseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeaeeaae
                                                                              aaa aaaa aaa eaa aaa sss asGEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEES 27

   OHCS Sole Discretion...                       cece ec cecennnneaee cee ceeeee eee eeeee sea aaaaaeaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeseaaaaaaaaaaaaaaeaeeeeseeeeeeeesenenig 28
   Project/Request Denial .................ccccccccsccccssssscccessseceecessseseesssaeesessaeeeesessseecsseseeescesseesesessseeseeaeeescesaaesensgs 28
   Financial SOIVENCY .............ccccccceecceseesneenseeneeneeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
                                                                         see aae aaa aaa seas Aaa sAG AGA AAGSEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEES 29

   Take such other action aS APPropriate ............... ccc eeeeseesssssssseceeceeeeeeeeceeeeeceeceeeeeseeeseeeeeseeaeeanaaaaaaaaaaeaeeegses 29
Disclaimer oo.                ee cee cee eeeeeeseeneeaeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeteseaaaaaaeaeeaeeeeeeeeeeeenssesaaaaaaaaaaaaaeaeaceseeeeeeeesensaaaaaaaaaeaaeaeneas 29
VIOLATIONS ....2.. oo.       eee     cenetenee cee ceeeeeeee eee eeetena aaa aaeaeaaeeeeeeeeeeeee ee enenesaaaaaaeaeeseseaeeeese ens eaaaaaaaaaaaaeaeeceeeeeeeeee en 30
REMEGIECS 20...               cece cee eeeeeeeeeee nae aaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenetenesaaaaaaaaeaaeaeaeaeeeeeeeenesasaaaaaaaaaeaeaseseeeeeeeesenstaaaaaaaaaeaeeaeneas 30
Effective Date 0.0... ccccescceeeeesenaeeeeeeeeeesaeeeeeeeessaaaeeeeeeesesaaeaeeeeeseeeaaaeeeeeeesesaaaaeeseeenseaaaeeseeensesaaaeseeeeniaas 31
Appendix A: Enhanced Accessibility Standards .................::c:::sssssesseesseesseeeeceseeeeeeceeceeceeeeeseseesseaseaaaaaaaaaaaas 32

Appendix B: Public Comments and ReSpOnsess ...............:::::ccsesssessseseeeeeeeceeceeceeceeseeeeeneeaeeeaseaaeaaaaaaeaaeaaeesees 34
                                             2025 Oregon QAP



Introduction
The Tax Reform Act of 1986 created the Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) under Section 42 of the
Internal Revenue Code (Code or IRC).

The LIHTC Program (or Resource) is jointly administered by the United States Treasury Department of
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and authorized state tax credit allocation agencies. Under Executive Order
EO-87-06, the Governor of Oregon designated the Oregon Housing and Community Services Department
(OHCS) as the administrator of the LIHTC Program.

OHCS administers the LIHTC Program under Oregon Administrative Rule (OAR) Chapter 813, Division 90.
This Qualified Allocation Plan (QAP or Plan) is intended to comply with the requirements of Section
42(m)(1)(B) of the Code, which requires that a QAP set forth:

1)   The selection criteria OHCS will use to determine its housing priorities,

2)   The preferences of OHCS in allocating housing credit dollar amounts among selected projects
     (Projects), including:

         a.   Projects serving the lowest income tenants.

         b.   Projects obligated to serve qualified tenants for the longest periods.

         c.   Projects that are located in qualified census tracts and the development of which
              contributes to a concerted community revitalization plan; and

         d.   The procedures that OHCS must follow in monitoring for program noncompliance in
              notifying the IRS of such noncompliance and in monitoring for noncompliance with Project
              habitability standards through regular site visits.

Section 42(m)(1)(C) of the Code provides the selection criteria that must be used. The selection criteria
outlined in a QAP must include:

1)   Project location.

2)   Housing needs characteristics.

3)   Project characteristics, including whether the Project includes the use of existing housing as part of a
     community revitalization plan.

4)   Sponsor characteristics.

5)   Tenant populations with special housing needs.

6)   Public housing waiting lists.

7)   Tenant populations of individuals with children.

8)   Projects intended for eventual tenant ownership.

9)   The energy efficiency of the Project.

10) The historic nature of the Project.


                                                                                                  1|Page
                                          2025 Oregon QAP


This Plan does not apply to the allocation of a “recycled” volume cap per Section 146(i)(6) of the Code.
Such “recycled” volume cap shall be assigned and allocated in accordance with policies and procedures
established from time to time by OHCS.



If any provision of this Plan (and documents included herein by reference) is inconsistent with the
provisions of amended    IRC Section 42, including any future amendments thereto, or any existing or new
OAR governing the LIHTC Program, the provisions of IRC Section 42 and/or the OAR take precedence,
and the Plan will be amended accordingly.



The Plan has been revised for 2025. OHCS reserves the option to issue temporary public notices, rules,
or other guidance through which, procedurally, OHCS will continue to efficiently administer the LIHTC
Program, in a manner consistent with this Plan, and with OHCS’s goals.




Additionally, OHCS reserves the right to amend, modify, or withdraw provisions contained in this Plan
that are inconsistent or in conflict with state or federal laws or regulations. In the event of a major
natural disaster, pandemic, epidemic, disruption in the financial markets, or reduction in subsidy
resources available, including tax credits, OHCS may disregard any section of the Plan, including
evaluation criteria, that interferes with an appropriate response.



A public hearing was held concerning the Plan on December 16, 2024, after appropriate notice was
provided following IRS Section 42(m)(1)(A)(ii). Public comments and agency responses can be found in
Appendix B: Public Comments and Responses in this document.




                                                                                                   2|Page
                                          2025 Oregon QAP



Credit Overview
4% Low-Income Housing Tax Credits

The State of Oregon (State) has access to allocate federal tax credits specifically available to Projects
financed using tax-exempt bond proceeds associated with Oregon’s private activity bond authority. The
tax-exempt bonds are subject to the volume cap limitations in Section 146 of the Code as further
detailed in Section 42(h)(4)(A) and (B) of the Code.

OHCS allocates the Private Activity Bonds (PAB) as resources become available utilizing the Oregon
Centralized Application (ORCA) structure. Specifics of this offering are made available in the LIHTC
relevant sections of the ORCA. All set-asides, prioritizations, and performance standards within the
ORCA will remain applicable and required. All definitions in the ORCA Manual are incorporated by
reference.




9% Low-Income Housing Tax Credits
OHCS allocates the State’s 9% LIHTCs based on selection criteria integrated into the ORCA. All allocations
are made with evaluative considerations required in the QAP, the Code, and the ORCA itself. All
definitions in the ORCA Manual are incorporated by reference.

Specific to the 9% tax credits, OHCS holds the following:

1)   10% of the annual credit ceiling must go to qualified nonprofits, those organizations described in
     section 501(c)(3) or section 501(c)(4) of the Code and that has as one of its exempt purposes the
     “fostering of low-income housing” as required by IRC §42 (h)(5). Non-profits awarded under this set-
     aside are required to meet the IRC requirements of Material Participation as defined by §469(h).

2)   9% tax credits are offered annually using the following set-aside targets:

         a.   25% of the annual credit ceiling is reserved for preservation projects, consistent with the
              preservation criteria outlined in the ORCA.

         b.   10% of the annual credit ceiling is reserved for developments that serve Native Nations on
              tribal trust land.

         c.   65% of the annual credit ceiling should be allocated consistent with the percentages
              outlined in the ORCA.




Determination of Credit Amount
The owner of a low-income housing property must certify to OHCS that the Project meets the minimum
requirements of:




                                                                                                   3|Page
                                          2025 Oregon QAP


1)   20-50 test under Section 42(g)(1)(A) of the Code,

2)   40-60 test under Section 42(g)(1)(B) of the Code, or

3)   Income averaging test under Section 42(g)(1)(C).




OHCS makes the financial feasibility and viability determination required under Section 42(m)(2)(A) for
all 4% and 9% LIHTC allocations. The Code requires OHCS to allocate only what is necessary for financial
feasibility throughout the extended use period. OHCS will evaluate each proposed Project considering
relevant factors, including but not limited to the following items:

1)   Project cost, including the reasonableness of cost per unit, developer fees and overhead, consultant
     fees, builder profit and overhead, and syndication costs;

2)   Sources and uses of funds and the total financing planned for the Project, including the ability of the
     Project to service debt;

3)   The proceeds or receipts expected to be generated because of tax benefits;

4)   The use of federal funds and other assistance; and

5)   Other factors that may be relevant to the economic feasibility of the Project, such as the area
     economy or the housing market.



Based on this evaluation, OHCS will estimate the amount of tax credits to be reserved for the Project.
This determination is made at the sole discretion of OHCS and is in no way a representation as to the
actual feasibility of the Project. Rather, it will serve as the basis for making reservations of tax credits for
Projects competing for credit from the federal housing credit ceiling, or it will serve as an initial
determination of credit amount concerning a Project financed by private activity bonds. The amount of
tax credits may change during the allocation process due to variations in cost, mortgage amount, tax
credit percentage, syndication proceeds, etc. The final tax credit determination is made at the sole
discretion of OHCS at the time of close-out application and before the issuance of IRS Form 8609, (Low-
Income Housing Credit Allocation and Certification) as detailed in the Placed-In-Service Allocation
Requirements section of this QAP.




If there is a material increase in LIHTC pricing after a reservation of tax credits, OHCS reserves the right
to adjust the amount of a tax credit award or any other OHCS funding source. OHCS may use the
following guidelines for avoiding Project over-subsidization. Subject to the approval of OHCS, the
increase may be used:

1)   To decrease rents.

2)   To reduce the permanent loan, sponsor loans, tax credit allocation, or other OHCS funding sources
     as determined by OHCS in consultation with the Project ownership.




                                                                                                     4|Page
                                           2025 Oregon QAP


3)   For necessary and justifiable cost increases or to reduce deferred developer fees, as allowable under
     the Code.




Pursuant to Section 42(m)(1)(A)(iii)   of the Code,   a comprehensive market study of the housing needs of
low-income individuals in the area to be served by the Project must be conducted by a disinterested
third party approved by OHCS before the credit allocation is made and at the developer’s expense.




Applying for Credits
Project Charges
When applying for or receiving any program funds, the applicant must pay applicable charges, as
adopted by the Oregon Housing Stability Council (HSC). These charges include but are not limited to,
application charges, recipient charges, reservation fees, issuance charges, and compliance charges. The
charges adopted by the HSC are included in the General Policy and Guidelines Manual (GPGM), as well
as posted on the Oregon Centralized Application (ORCA) webpage of the OHCS website.



LIHTC Allocation Application Process
All applications for LIHTC are evaluated and reviewed through the ORCA. For selected applicants, all
projects must meet ORCA standards and expectations, including, but not limited to, standards,
timelines, and documentation. These are in addition to, not in lieu of, requirements and expectations
from the QAP and any other programmatic requirements of the LIHTC program.

Applications for 4% Low-Income Housing Tax Credits and Conduit Bond Financing. OHCS offers 4%
LIHTC and associated Private Activity Bonds (PAB) on a rolling basis as resources remain available and
retains a waitlist of projects in alignment with the ORCA policies.

 Projects are evaluated using the process laid out by OHCS below, and the number of projects selected
are based on available resources through the ORCA. In managing the states’ PAB resource investments
to support housing, OHCS will work annually with the Housing Authorities of Oregon to establish a
Housing Authority Owned       (HAO) PAB set-aside. This HAO PAB set-aside is eligible for projects that are
owned by Housing Authorities and do not require any state loan or grant funding, as defined below.
These resources are held for that following year; unused resources that are not requested within the
timelines, along with PAB that was not set-aside for HAO Projects, are offered through the ORCA for
eligible applications and projects.

             Housing Authority Owned      (HAO) definition

             1)   Required:
                      a.   Site control including Housing Authority or county owned    land;
                      b.   51% or more ownership interest and control of the General Partner or
                           Managing Member entity


                                                                                                   5|Page
                                             2025 Oregon QAP


                        c.   For the purposes of PAB: Project does not require state loan or grant funding.
             2)    Must meet one:
                        a.   Aloanor contribution of either cash or value representing the lesser of at least
                             10% of total sources or $2 million, including but not limited to seller financing in
                             a rehabilitation/resyndication, a sponsor loan, a land lease loan, or a land lease
                             contribution.
                        b.   Federal, state, or locally-provided project based rent assistance for at least the
                             lower of 15 units or 15% of units.


Applications for 9% Low-Income Housing Tax Credits will be accepted and reviewed annually as funding
availability allows. 9% LIHTC projects will be notified of their status, and those selected to move forward
into the ORCA process will be given access to a Procorem Workcenter to begin the ORCA process’s
Impact Assessment. Applicants not selected can choose to have the project placed on the ORCA 9%
LIHTC waitlist which will remain active through September of each calendar year. Projects may not be on
more than one waitlist for resources within the ORCA.        If projects are on the 9% LIHTC waitlist and
sufficient credits become available (from a return of credit or otherwise) projects will be funded in order
from the waitlist as resources will allow. If 9% LIHTC are not fully allocated after all eligible projects are
selected, or sufficient credits are returned from a failed project OHCS may, at its discretion, either
consider projects on a first-come first-reviewed basis or open a subsequent window or windows for
acceptance of intake forms for 9% LIHTC projects.

OHCS reserves the right to waive, change, or alter any timelines, processing, and other QAP
requirements, at its sole discretion, to encourage and facilitate the financing of tax-exempt, 4% LIHTC
and 9% LIHTC financed projects including, but not limited to, implementing application pauses and
blackout dates, and increasing allocations of LIHTC and PAB.




Project Performance Guidelines

All applications including those funded, in underwriting, or forthcoming are subject to:

        a.   Any stipulations outlined by OHCS in writing via project-specific documents, OHCS programs,
             or policy manuals.

        b.   Limitation of one applicant requested 30-day extension to the financial close date per
             project.

        c.   Availability on the OHCS financing calendar.

        d.   Formal notification to OHCS regarding any material changes to the project throughout
             underwriting or post-construction close. Including but not limited to:

             (1)   The number of buildings or units,

             (2)   The project contact person,

             (3)   The Identity of Interest disclosure,




                                                                                                      6|Page
                                             2025 Oregon QAP


             (4)   The development team,

             (5) The project’s total project costs,

             (6) A financing source (whether debt or equity),

             (7) Operating revenue or expenses for the project of more than ten percent,

             (8)   Anything that would result in a change in the standards OHCS uses to evaluate projects,

             (9)   Changing the scope of the project, such as adding or subtracting buildings, square
                   footage, units, and design elements that impact the budget and livability of tenants,

             (10)Changing project type and switching to a different intended tenant population,

             (11)Replacing sponsor and project ownership in a way that has a financial impact on the
                   project,

             (12)Showing a gap, after funding approval and prior to closing and construction start, of
                   more than 10 percent of OHCS investment (exclusive of tax credits).



Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 (HERA) Basis Boost
Under HERA and subject to update should federal regulation permit, OHCS has the authority to increase
the eligible basis for 9% LIHTC Projects from 100 percent eligible basis up to 130 percent of the eligible
basis when OHCS determines that the financial feasibility of the building requires it. OHCS has
determined that the financial feasibility of Project buildings meeting the criteria below may require a
basis boost of up to 130 percent.

1)   Rural Projects as defined using the methodology found in the ORCA,

2)   Preservation Projects,

3)   Projects containing      a minimum of either 25% or 5, whichever is greater, permanent supportive
     housing units,

4)   Projects that meet Enhanced Accessibility standards as defined in Attachment A: Enhanced
     Accessibility Standards,

5)   Projects sited on tribal lands,

6)   Projects with at least 20% of the units restricted to LIHTC 30% AMI rents and income limits,

7)   Projects that are located in Transit Oriented Districts (TODs) as designated by local governments,

8)   Projects that result in the de-concentration of poverty by locating low-income housing in low-
     poverty areas, which are Census Tracts where 10 percent or less of the population lives below the
     poverty level,

9)   Projects that co-locate Early Care and Education (ECE) facilities with affordable housing. Co-located
     as defined by OAR 813-125-0011.


                                                                                                  7|Page
                                          2025 Oregon QAP


Returned / Unused LIHTC Allocation Authority
Specific to 9% LIHTC - If an application considered for a LIHTC reservation/allocation is withdrawn or
canceled, available credits were not originally allocated during the funding round, a project cannot make
its carryover requirements, or the National Pool, as prescribed at IRS section 42(h)(3)(D)(iii), is awarded
above current estimates, OHCS may do any of the following:

1)   Fund the next project from the list of eligible 9% LIHTC ORCA applications for that year, if applicable.
     The applicant is given 30 days to reevaluate the project’s financial feasibility and determine whether
     the proposed project can move forward or not,

2)   Opena second and subsequent funding round through the ORCA process,

3)   Add the returned amount to the total available credits for the following calendar year’s application
     cycle. Any credits returned after September 30 of any year will be treated as if received in the
     following year and will be allocated as part of the next allocation year.

OHCS may take such steps as it deems appropriate to maintain the desired funding split between set-
aside categories outlined in the ORCA.




Re-evaluation of Reservation
The following events will result in a re-evaluation of a previously issued reservation:

1)   Failure to close within three hundred days of the reservation (“Reservation Period”),

2)   The proposed Project will not have construction completion by the date mutually agreed upon,

3)   The proposed Project will not be placed in service by the date mutually agreed upon,

4)   Other material changes at OHCS’s reasonable discretion.




Agency authority to use discretion
In the event of a re-evaluation of a reservation, OHCS, at its reasonable discretion may do one of the
following:

1)   Revoke the reservation.

2)   Approve the requested changes to the original reservation or application as proposed.

3)   Leave the reservation in place with no changes.




                                                                                                   8|Page
                                          2025 Oregon QAP



Project Selection Process
The following section describes the criteria and process used to apply for tax credits.




Private Activity Bonds and 4% Low-Income Housing Tax Credits
The following is an overview of the process for requesting 4% LIHTC and PAB through the ORCA. All
projects, including HAO projects, must meet ORCA standards and expectations, including, but not
limited to, standards, timelines, and documentation. These are in addition to, not in lieu of,
requirements and expectations from the QAP and any other programmatic requirements of the LIHTC
program.



Intake Process

Projects applying for 4% LIHTC and PAB resources, with or without state subsidy requests, must apply
through the agency’s ORCA process and designate their application as a 4% LIHTC and PAB request by
selecting that option in their ORCA Intake Form (Intake Form). OHCS does not guarantee the award or
recommendation of a PAB allocation based solely on this Intake Form designation, but any Intake Form
that does not request 4% LIHTC and PAB will not be directed towards the PAB application. The Intake
Form submission should also indicate the amount of gap resources the applicant intends to request, or
the application will be considered as a HAO PAB Set-Aside project (see HAO Project Selection section).
OHCS will determine the appropriate gap resources to assign to the project based on the project design,
location, gap resource availability and other factors.

When   PAB resources are included in the ORCA resources, project sponsors who submitted Intake Forms
for 4% LIHTC and PAB that have been reviewed and approved by OHCS are given access to a Procorem
WorkCenter to begin the ORCA Impact Assessment application step.




Project Selection
Project applications that are submitted are evaluated in the ORCA, and the number of projects selected
for funding recommendation are based on available PAB volume cap, and corresponding gap resource
availability. Through the ORCA, PAB will be tracked and allocated based upon a first completed, first
reviewed process and in alignment with the estimated closing date of the project as provided by the
applicant. Where resources are insufficient to fund all projects, a waitlist of projects is maintained.

OHCS will steward and strive to maximize the leverage of the state’s PAB authority that is made
available for affordable housing investments. The project selection process for the 4% LIHTC / PAB
projects relies on the ORCA process and readiness requirements.      However, where there is a risk that
OHCS will not substantially commit all available PAB to projects in a given year, OHCS reserves the right
to reassign resources within the funded pipeline or direct resources to projects on the ORCA waitlists
based on development timelines.     This PAB Timeline Prioritization establishes criteria that are applied to
                                                                                                   9|Page
                                            2025 Oregon QAP


identify best-fit projects that have been reviewed in the Impact Assessment and are on an ORCA waitlist.
In addition, OHCS reserves the right to allocate PAB to fund pipeline gaps or challenges as it deems
necessary.



HAO Project Selection
In managing the states’ PAB resource investments to support housing, OHCS will work annually with the
Housing Authorities of Oregon to establish a Housing Authority Owned      (HAO) PAB Set-Aside. This HAO
PAB Set-Aside is eligible for projects that are owned   by Housing Authorities and do not require any state
loan or grant funding, as defined above.

These resources will be held for that following year; unused resources that are not requested within the
timelines, along with PAB that was not set-aside for HAO projects, are offered through the ORCA.
Housing Authorities may choose to issue the bonds for HAO projects where sufficient capacity is
demonstrated and within OHCS suballocation policies.       Housing Authority sponsored projects that
request gap funding and 4% LIHTC through the traditional ORCA application will not count against the
HAO set-aside.    Every year by February 28th (year 0), Housing Authorities must provide OHCS with:

1)   HAO Project list for the subsequent year’s (year 1) PAB resource needs; these projects will be
     required to submit full applications and ORCA process requirements, and

2)   HAO future pipeline for the following year (year 2) which will be used to support the determination
     of the needed HAO set-aside and will be considered by OHCS alongside state resource needs; these
     projects will be submitted through the ORCA intake within a year.




PAB Award Calculations and Commitments

To determine PAB award needs, OHCS utilizes the Total Project Cost dollar amount from the Impact
Assessment proforma to make an estimate of PAB utilization (55% of the total project cost). Project PAB
resource needs must remain within 10% of the requested amount in the Impact Assessment application
or they may be required to forfeit the resource commitment and re-apply for resources as a new
application.

Where projects are determined to have material changes, the resource commitment will be deemed
invalid. OHCS will review project change to determine if it is material. Material changes that may result
in loss of PAB include, but are not limited to, a change in:

1)   The number of buildings or units,

2)   The project contact person,

3)   The Identity of Interest disclosure,

4)   The development team,

5)   The project’s total project costs,


                                                                                                10|Page
                                         2025 Oregon QAP


6)   A financing source (whether debt or equity),

7)   Operating revenue or expenses for the project of more than ten percent,

8)   Anything that would result in a change in the standards OHCS uses to evaluate projects,

9)   Changing the scope of the project, such as adding or subtracting buildings, square footage, units,
     and design elements that impact the budget and livability of tenants,

10) Changing project type and switching to a different intended tenant population,

11) Replacing sponsor and project ownership in a way that has a financial impact on the project,

12) Showing a gap, after funding approval and prior to closing and construction start, of more than 10
     percent of OHCS investment (exclusive of tax credits).



NOTE:   Changes in projects that incorporate value engineering are not considered material changes.
Changes or delays due to actions or inactions taken by local, state or federal jurisdictions are also not
considered material changes.



Timelines and Closing Dates
Estimated closing dates are required at Intake and Impact Assessment and form the basis of a project’s
readiness estimation and timelines. OHCS recognizes that these dates are estimates and likely to
change, however, all projects must meet the timelines associated with each step of the ORCA process or
their PAB hold may be forfeited. OHCS may require timelines to move based upon a number of factors
including PAB availability.



In the event that a project does not move forward within required ORCA timelines or does not meet
required standards within the ORCA process, PAB will be reallocated by OHCS.




Additional Process Information

1)   For selected applicants, the projects must meet ORCA standards and expectations, including, but not
     limited to, standards, timelines, and documentation. These are in addition to, not in lieu of,
     requirements and expectations from the QAP and any other programmatic requirements of the
     LIHTC program,

2)   After Impact Assessment application evaluation, projects must receive HSC approval for state
     resource commitments if such resources are needed for the project and included in the initial
     proforma. A Letter of Intent (LOI) will be issued by OHCS based on an up-to amount for both the gap
     resources and PAB,

3)   At the Financial Eligibility step, project sponsors provide a comprehensive, detailed proforma, with
     cost estimates supported by bids. The LOI is updated with a more precise amount at this time,

                                                                                                 11|Page
                                          2025 Oregon QAP


4)   The proforma provided at Financial Eligibility should have,

         a.   Costs within 10% of the Impact Assessment proforma and the allowable PAB further refined,
              and

         b.   Complete due diligence submitted by the readiness timeline requirements.

5)   Projects may be held at the final step in the ORCA process, the Commitment step, until closing dates
     are available. If a project is held by OHCS for reasons outlined in this Plan or at OHCS’s discretion,
     the readiness timeline requirements are suspended during that period. Once projects have finished
     the Commitment step, they are moved forward into the closing stage and have no more than 6
     months to close. Projects that do not close in the 6 month    period will be removed from the queue
     and must restart the ORCA process,

6)   Projects must return to HSC at completion of the Commitment step to lock in the PAB rate. Once the
     PAB allocation is locked, any surplus can be released.




9% Low-Income Housing Tax Credits
Intake and Request Form
Projects applying for 9% LIHTC resources must complete a 9% LIHTC Request Form identifying their
interest. The 9% Request Form will be available for    a minimum of six weeks, and the open period will be
announced     by OHCS through a Technical Advisory at least two weeks in advance of opening.

The 9% Request Form will be used to evaluate, screen, and, if necessary, rank 9% project applications by
the adopted tie-breaker criteria. While it will not include all documentation required for finalizing
resource commitments, it will require more information and detail than the general ORCA Project Intake
form.

Projects recommended for 9% LIHTC will be required to meet all applicable evaluation standards in the
ORCA to retain resource reservation. Information provided in the 9% Request Form and following
through the application process constitute application commitments for the project. Such commitments
made regarding the character, quality, and financing of a project in the 9% selection process will be
enforced during the underwriting process and beyond. Departure from those commitments will trigger
reconsideration of the award.




Application Process
Projects are evaluated using the process laid out by OHCS below, and the number of projects selected
are based on available resources identified as available for that funding round. Applications for 9% LIHTC
are accepted and reviewed annually as funding availability allows. 9% LIHTC projects will be notified of
their status, and those selected to move forward into the ORCA process will be given access to a
Procorem Workcenter to begin the ORCA process’s Impact Assessment.

Applicants not selected can choose to have the project placed on a reserve list for consideration of any
potential 9% LIHTC credits that may come available. This option remains active through September of
                                                                                                   12|Page
                                           2025 Oregon QAP


each calendar year. The reserve list is cleared each year on October 1. If have opted in as 9% LIHTC
reserve projects and sufficient credits become available (from a return of credit or otherwise) projects
are funded in order from the original tiebreaker list as resources will allow. If 9% LIHTC are not fully
allocated after all eligible projects are selected, or sufficient credits are returned from a failed project
OHCS may, at its discretion, either consider projects on a first-come first-reviewed basis or opena
subsequent window or windows for acceptance of intake forms for 9% LIHTC projects.

For selected applicants, all projects must meet ORCA standards and expectations, including, but not
limited to, standards, timelines, and documentation. These are in addition to, not in lieu of,
requirements and expectations from the QAP and any other programmatic requirements of the LIHTC
program.



Project Criteria
In order to select new construction projects to access 9% LIHTC through the ORCA process, OHCS will
use the following criteria to create the list of projects that are eligible to be moved forward to Impact
Assessment. Projects must meet mandatory threshold criteria and 3 or more supplemental criteria to
meet the eligibility standard.




If the total resources requested by projects that meet minimum threshold for this evaluation is greater
than the total resources available, projects will then be evaluated against tie-breaker criteria. The
number of projects selected to move forward with the comprehensive ORCA application using 9% LIHTC
will depend upon total resources available.



Mandatory Criteria
Projects must meet all of the following mandatory criteria.

        Responsive to Tenant/Community Needs
             1.   Project includes features in the design, services, site location, or other project
                  considerations that are tailored to the population being served (e.g. appropriate levels
                  of supportive services for chronically homeless households, co-located ECE facility for
                  families with young children, universal design features for older adults and people with
                  disabilities, transportation opportunities or unique design features for veterans, unique
                  features or access to locations of cultural significance for communities of color, etc.).

             2.   Project demonstrates alignment with the Oregon Housing Needs Analysis (OHNA) and
                  local jurisdiction housing production strategies, in that there is shown to be a need for
                  the AMI level the project is proposing. Small cities under 10,000 population without an
                  OHNA requirement are exempt from this requirement.

        Community Needs
             3.   Project has supporting documentation from a local Housing Authority demonstrating
                  that a commitment is in place to market available units to their wait list, or will rely on
                  coordinated entry for tenant referrals.
                                                                                                   13 |Page
                                            2025 Oregon QAP




Supplemental Criteria
Projects must meet at least three of the following supplemental criteria. While encouraged, projects will
not be prioritized over other projects for including more than three of these criteria.

         Responsive to Tenant/Community Needs
             1.   Project incorporates an average unit Area Median Income (AMI) of less than 50% or are
                  including Project-Based Rental Assistance (PBRA) with at least 20% of their units.

             2.   Project contains facilities or space designed to support families with young children as
                  defined by OAR     813-125-0011.

             3.   Project includes accessible units beyond minimum      code requirements.

         Economic/Workforce Impact
             4.   Project includes features in the design, services, site location or other project
                  considerations that provide opportunities for employment to residents and benefit to
                  the community (e.g. co-located ECE facility for families with young children, access to
                  community college or workforce training site, walkable access or access to transit to
                  high job density locations).



         Section 42 considerations
             5.   Projects demonstrate evidence of historic value for the community, including Projects
                  using the federal Historic Tax Credit (HTC) as part of the Project financing, and are:
                  Listed, or have been determined eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic
                  Places administered by the U.S. Department of the Interior in accordance with the
                  National Historic Preservation Act of 1996; or Located in a registered historic district and
                  certified by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of the Interior as being of historic
                  significance to that district.

             6.   Projects that have formally committed to meeting the Department’s Sustainability
                  Standards which include energy efficiency expectations that exceed current State of
                  Oregon Energy Code requirements.

             7.   Projects intended for eventual tenant ownership.

         Organization Type
             8.   Lead developer is a Culturally Specific Organization and/or a nonprofit organization
                  developing in a rural area.




Tiebreakers
Projects that meet the threshold for evaluation under the above criteria will be further prioritized, if
necessary, using the following criteria, in the order listed below, with a. being the first considered and d.
being the last:


                                                                                                      14|Page
                                          2025 Oregon QAP


        a.   Policy enriched:

             Project contains at least one of the following characteristics:

                 e   Permanent Supportive Housing (meeting all PSH standards described in the ORCA,
                     and with a minimum of 25% or 5 units, whichever is greater, dedicated to this
                     model),

                 e   Contains facilities or space designed to support families with young children defined
                     by OAR     813-125-0011,

                 e   Enhanced accessibility as defined in Attachment A: Enhanced Accessibility
                     Standards.

        b.   Federal Subsidy Leverage:

             Project has committed leverage of at least $100,000 of HOME, or Community Development
             Block Grant Funds (CDBG), Tax Increment Finance, or another OHCS-approved           place-based
             economic development fund that is awarded for gap funding by Participating Jurisdictions in
             lieu of HOME.

        c.   Efficient Unit Production:

             Projects will be ranked based on the total number of credits requested per units being
             provided for the community, with the lowest ratio first and the highest ratio last.

        d.   Average AMI:

             Projects will be ranked based on the lowest average household AMI served, with the lowest
             average AMI being first and the highest last.



Preservation Projects
Preservation projects are defined by the Preservation Funding Frameworks adopted by OHCS to include:
projects at risk of loss due to physical or financial challenges, properties with federal project-based rent
assistance at imminent risk of loss, and expiring properties at risk of conversion to market-rate. To apply
for 9% LIHTC, preservation projects will also submit    a 9% Request Form which will have the applicant
provide project-specific details for the resource investment request. These 9% Request Forms for
Preservation will be evaluated in alignment with criteria established within the OHCS Preservation
Funding Framework. This framework establishes criteria to assess risk within each of the following
applicable preservation project types: Risk of Loss Physical or Financial Challenges; Risk of Loss Federal
Project-Based Rent Assistance; Risk of Loss Expiration and Conversion to Market-Rate.

OHCS will evaluate applications against criteria in their respective preservation-type to identify projects
that meet Critical Priority thresholds. Once all Critical properties are identified, if there are more
projects than are able to be funded, OHCS will utilize tiebreakers to determine which projects will be
selected to move forward into the ORCA process. If no Critical properties are identified, OHCS will follow
the same process but evaluate properties in the High Priority category. If no High Priority properties are
identified, OHCS will follow the same process but evaluate properties in the Medium Priority category.


                                                                                                   15|Page
                                            2025 Oregon QAP


For the purposes of preservation priorities, households that meet both of the following criteria are
considered vulnerable:

    e   Households that are Very Low Income (earning 50% or less of the Area Median Income), and



    e   One or more of the following is true of the household:
             o    Oneor more resident identifies as a person with disabilities (including behavior health
                  challenges, substance use disorder, etc.),
                  One or more resident represents a historically underserved population,
             0




                  The primary language spoken in the household is a language other than English,
             0




                  Includes one or more children under 18,
             0




                  At least one member of the household is 62 years old or older.
             Oo




        Project Criteria: Risk of Loss Physical or Financial Challenges
        For properties at risk of loss due to physical or financial challenges being experienced, those
        deemed to be critical priority will be those in which all of the following are true:

        1)   Applicant is a Culturally Specific Organization;

        2)   Project is currently at-risk; and,

        3)   Two thirds or greater of households in the property are considered vulnerable by OHCS’s
             definition.




        Those deemed to be a high priority will be those in which all of the following are true:

        1)   Applicant is either a Culturally Specific Organization or a Culturally Responsive Organization;

        2)   Project is at-risk within the next five years; and,

        3)   One third or greater of households in the property are considered vulnerable by OHCS’s
             definition.




        Those deemed to be a medium priority will be those in which all of the following are true:

        1)   Project is at-risk within the next seven years; and,

        2)   One third or greater of households in the property are considered vulnerable by OHCS’s
             definition.




        Project Criteria: Risk of Loss Federal Project-Based Rent Assistance
        For properties at risk of loss of existing Federal Project-Based Rent Assistance (PBRA), those
        deemed to be critical priority will be those in which both of the following are true:

        1)   PBRA is at risk within two years of the date of application; and,


                                                                                                 16|Page
                                    2025 Oregon QAP


2)   At least 50% of the units in the property have PBRA.



Those deemed to be high priority will be those in which both of the following are true:

1)   PBRA is at risk within five years of the date of application; and,

2)   At least 50% of the units in the property have PBRA.



Those deemed to be medium priority will be those in which the following is true:

1)   PBRA is at risk within seven years of the date of application.



Project Criteria: Risk of Loss Expiration and Conversion to Market-Rate
For properties at risk of loss due to expiration of affordability covenants and potential
conversion to market-rate, those deemed to be critical priority will be those in which either:

1)   The property is in a census tract defined as rural by OHCS; or

Both of the below are true:

1)   Either:

          a.    Fifty percent or more of units in the property either are rent-restricted to 50% AMI
                or lower, or have PBRA attached; or,

          b.    Twenty five percent or more of units in the property either are rent-restricted to
                30% AMI or lower, or have PBRA attached;

         And,

2)   One third or greater of tenant households are considered vulnerable by OHCS’s definition.



Those deemed to be high priority will be those in which the both of the following are true:

1)   Either:

          a.    Twenty five percent or more of units either are rent-restricted to 50% AMI or lower,
                or have PBRA attached; or,

          b.    The project includes any units rent-restricted at 30% AMI or lower;

         And,

2)   One third or greater of tenant households are considered vulnerable by OHCS’s definition.



There is no medium       priority categorization for this preservation type.


                                                                                          17|Page
                                            2025 Oregon QAP




         Preservation Tiebreakers
         Projects that meet threshold meeting the Critical priority definitions above will be further
         prioritized as necessary, using the following criteria, in the order listed below (with criteria 1.
         being the first considered and criteria 4. being the last) if all else is equal:

         1)   Projects in the Federal Project-Based Rent Assistance category,

        2)    Projects in the At Risk of Loss: Expiring Affordable Properties category (ranked in order of
              date of expiration of latest expiring restrictions, from soonest to latest),

        3)    Projects in Census Tracts with the highest market rate rents, as published by HUD,

        4)    Projects that would preserve the greatest number of rent-restricted units.




Programmatic Requirements
Minimum Requirements for LIHTC Projects
OHCS has the following minimum requirements for any LIHTC-funded project. Developers must
demonstrate through their application, during underwriting, in the lease-up process, and throughout the
extended use period their compliance with all applicable requirements. Failure to meet any of the
criteria may disqualify a project from receiving any funding presently or in the future.


Long-Term Affordability
All Projects awarded 9% LIHTC must remain affordable for 60 years.

All 4% LIHTC Projects must remain affordable for 60 years except for Projects where LIHTC resources are
paired with other OHCS resources offered for 4% LIHTC pairing for at least 30 years. When this pairing
happens, the LIHTC Project’s affordability will be at least 30 years and will match the affordability of the
paired source if it is over 30 years.



Resyndication Restrictions
Projects funded with LIHTC in 2025 and after are not eligible to apply for an additional 4% or 9% LIHTC
within 20 years of the Project’s Placed-In-Service date. Exceptions may be granted at the sole discretion
of OHCS in cases where it determines there is a risk of physical, affordability, or other loss.


Limited Partnership Agreement (LPA)
All project applicants and owners are responsible for understanding the specifics of their Limited
Partnership Agreement. OHCS expects all parties to execute the LPA document in good faith and
maintain the goal of producing and maintaining affordable housing throughout Oregon.




                                                                                                   18|Page
                                         2025 Oregon QAP


Violence Against Women Act
In conformity with the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) of 2013, an applicant for or tenant of
housing assisted under the LIHTC Program may not be denied admission to, denied assistance under,
terminated from participation in or evicted from the housing on the basis that the applicant or tenant is
or has been a victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault or stalking if the applicant or
tenant otherwise qualifies for admission, assistance, participation, or occupancy. An incident of
domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking shall not be considered a lease violation by
the victim, nor shall it be considered a good cause for an eviction. If a tenant who is a victim requests an
early lease termination, lease bifurcation from the abuser, or transfer to another unit because they are
in danger, a LIHTC owner, manager, or agent thereof shall make every effort to comply with the request
and shall not penalize the tenant.



Waiver of Qualified Contract
By submitting an application for LIHTC funding, all LIHTC Applicants waive the right to request a qualified
contract under Section 42(h)(6)(E)(i) of the Code. Thus, any OHCS-required extended use commitment
shall not terminate at the end of the compliance period but will have a minimum duration of 60 years
for 9% LIHTC and either 60 years or, if paired with a source that has a shorter affordability period, either
30 years or the length of affordability for the paired resource, whichever is greater, for 4% LIHTC
transactions.



Asset Management Compliance and Project Monitoring
As the authorized allocating agency for the state of Oregon, OHCS is responsible for monitoring Projects
for compliance with Section 42 of the Code, corresponding Treasury regulations, and any other
applicable IRS guidance (rulings, procedures, decisions, notices, and any other applicable IRS guidance),
the Fair Housing Act, state laws, local codes, OHCS loan or regulatory documentation, and any other
legal requirements in administering the LIHTC Program. Project owners (Owners) must comply with all
such requirements if implemented after this QAP is approved. OHCS is also responsible for establishing
monitoring procedures to verify compliance and is required by law to report noncompliance to the IRS.
Monitoring each Project is an ongoing activity that extends throughout the affordability period (a
minimum of 30 years).

Projects with funding sources obtained from OHCS in addition to the tax credits, will be monitored for
the most restrictive requirements of all combined OHCS programs. Owners must be aware of the
differences in Program regulations, including PSH projects which must adhere to OHCS' PSH Standards
and policies for tenant selection and low-barrier screening.

The OHCS’ LIHTC Compliance Manual is incorporated here by reference and may be found at
https://www.oregon.gov/ohcs/compliance-monitoring/pages/compliance-lihtc-program.aspx. OHCS
may perform an on-site review of any building in the Project, interview residents, review resident
applications and financial information, and review the Owner’s books and records relating to the Project
as consistent with the law and as OHCS determines it to be appropriate. Owner must provide OHCS
reasonable access to the Project and its books and records, and reasonably cooperate in all such
compliance monitoring. In connection with these obligations, an Owner must take all reasonably



                                                                                                 19|Page
                                         2025 Oregon QAP


necessary actions to allow OHCS to inspect housing units occupied by residents.



Program compliance
All OHCS Projects must satisfy the Program Requirements for each applicable OHCS funding source
reserved. Each OHCS funding source has separate requirements, which can be found in the
supplemental Program manuals.



Relocation Plan
If any relocation or displacement of existing tenants might occur because of an allocation, the
development team must provide a satisfactory relocation plan to OHCS including a complete survey of
existing tenants. The tenant survey must be in the OHCS-provided format and can be augmented to
include copies of the third-party verifications before construction closing for the project.


Ownership Integrity
OHCS may reject any application or solicitation of funding where any member, officer, principal, or
entity within the Project ownership, management, or development team:

Is under investigation by a public body or has a pending claim, indictment, suit, action, or other
proceeding against them. Has filed for or has a foreclosure judgement against. Has been removed as
owner, managing partner, or developer by other project lenders and funders within the previous five
years.

Has been convicted of or been determined by an administrative or judicial (whether criminal or civil)
order or judgment to have committed fraud, misrepresentation, theft, embezzlement, or any other act
of moral turpitude (including, but not limited to any felony or malicious behavior) within the previous
ten years.



Single-Asset Ownership
OHCS requires that each Project be owned     by a single-asset entity duly organized under the laws of the
State of Oregon, or if allowed by OHCS, duly authorized to conduct business in the State of Oregon.


Reservation and Extended Use Agreement
Projects that receive an OHCS allocations must enter into a Reservation and Extended Use Agreement
(REUA), satisfactory to OHCS, which includes executing and recording, at the Applicant’s expense, a
follow-on declaration of restrictive covenants and executing and recording other documents about the
Project satisfactory to OHCS. The provisions of the REUA, including the declaration of restrictive
covenants, will apply throughout the applicable “Affordability Period,” which includes the initial fifteen
(15) year compliance period, and an additional “extended low-income use period” as referenced in the
Project’s restrictive use agreements.




                                                                                                20|Page
                                          2025 Oregon QAP


Right of First Refusal (ROFR)
Applicable to Projects with Non-Profit General Partners. OHCS reserves the right to require any or all of
the following concerning LIHTC applications and funded projects:

1)   Provisions to be included in the Applicant’s organizational documents limiting transfers of
     partnership or member interest or other actions detrimental to the continued provision of
     affordable housing,

2)   Aletter of intent from a tax credit investor that grants to a qualified not-for-profit organization a
     right of first refusal (the “ROFR”) to purchase the project for a below-market purchase price (the
     “ROFR Purchase Price”), following the expiration of the tax credit compliance period, in accordance
     with Section 42(i)(7) of the Code,

3)   Terms in the extended use agreement requiring notice and approval by OHCS of transfer of
     partnership or member interests,

4)   Debarment from the program of Project sponsors, investors, syndicators, or lenders having
     demonstrated a history of conduct detrimental to long-term compliance with any extended use
     agreements, whether in Oregon or another state and the provision of affordable tax credit units,
     and

5)   Provisions to implement any amendment to the IRC or any future federal or state legislation,
     regulation, or administrative guidance.

The decision whether to institute and the terms of, any such requirements shall be made by OHCS as
reasonably determined to be necessary or appropriate to achieve the goals stated in this section and to
be in the best interest of the Plan.



LIHTC Reservation Requirements
All LIHTC Applicants must comply with the requirements of the ORCA, in addition to these requirements,
the following will also be applicable.


Requirements for Reservation
Those projects selected by OHCS as recipients of LIHTCs will be issued a LIHTC reservation (REUA),
Carryover Allocation (if applicable), and Form 8609 (Outlined in the Place-In-Service Allocation
Requirements section). OHCS may disqualify the Project/Applicant and cancel the LIHTC reservation
and/or Carryover Allocation if requirements are not met by the deadlines set by OHCS.



Reservation Period
If the Applicant does not satisfactorily complete the conditions of the LIHTC REUA and/or Carryover
Allocation Agreement, OHCS may rescind the LIHTC Reservation for the project. OHCS may reallocate
any 9% LIHTCs returned or rescinded. OHCS will require each Applicant who has received a LIHTC
reservation to demonstrate the project is making satisfactory progress toward completion through
regular progress reports.


                                                                                                  21|Page
                                          2025 Oregon QAP


No Representation or Warranty
Issuance of an OHCS funding resource reservation shall not constitute or be construed as a
representation or warranty as to the feasibility or viability of the Project, or the Project's ongoing
capacity for success, or any conclusions with respect to any matter of federal or state law. All OHCS
resources are subject to various state and federal regulations governing the specific Program from which
they are obtained, and Applicants are responsible for the determination of their Project’s eligibility and
compliance consistent with all Project requirements.




Determination of the LIHTC Allocation Authority Year (9% Specific)
When making a reservation of LIHTC, OHCS reserves the right to make an allocation of a future year’s
credit ceiling (Forward Allocation). Such Forward Allocation(s) may be full or partial for the Project(s).
The applicable QAP will be the plan in place for the earliest funding cycle in which an award of funds is
received.



Carryover Allocation Requirements (9% LIHTC Specific)
Once a project is successfully selected for an allocation of 9% LIHTCs. The following requirements must
be met in addition to any of those requirements by the department or other resources allocated to the
project.




9% LIHTC Carryover Allocation Agreement
9% LIHTC Applicants, on or before November 1st of the LIHTC Allocation Authority Year, must submit
either an application for LIHTC Carryover Allocation (if the Project is still in the construction phase), or a
final application indicating the Project has been placed-in-service. All LIHTC Carryover Allocations will be
made ona per Project basis. The LIHTC amount that qualifies for a reservation to any Project is the lump
sum amount of available to each qualified building in the Project. The actual amount of LIHTCs available
for any specific building will be apportioned from the lump sum Carryover Allocation of Credit and
determined when that building satisfies the placed-in-service allocation requirements.



10% Carryover Test for 9% LIHTC Projects
Within twelve (12) months of the date of the Carryover Allocation Agreement, the 9% LIHTC Applicant
must demonstrate to the satisfaction of OHCS that it has incurred more than ten percent (10%) of the
reasonably expected basis of the Project by certifying to OHCS that it has fulfilled this requirement and
by submitting a CPA’s certification.

The required CPA’s certification should itemize all the costs incurred to satisfy the ten percent (10%)
requirement. If the Applicant is itemizing any portion of the developer fee or consultant fees for
purposes of satisfying the ten percent (10%) requirement, the certification must contain a detailed
breakdown of the services performed by the developer and each consultant and the amount of the fees
apportioned to each service. The Applicant must also submit a copy of all developer and consultant
contracts as well as an itemized statement apportioning the fees earned to each service provided.

                                                                                                  22|Page
                                          2025 Oregon QAP


OHCS may require the Applicant to submit additional documentation of the costs reflected in the
certification and OHCS may limit or exclude certain costs if it cannot determine that they are reasonable
and appropriate.




Exchange of 9% Credit Award for Subsequent Years Credit Allocation
Once an Applicant has received a reservation of LIHTCs, the Applicant has the responsibility to complete
the Project by the timelines identified in IRC Section 42 and outlined by OHCS. OHCS reserves the
authority to exchange an allocation of credits from one year to credits in the subsequent year with the
amount unchanged. Applicants must demonstrate good cause to return their reservation to OHCS, and
is limited to one return per application. This practice is also called a “credit swap” or a “credit refresh.”

No later than March 31st of the year following the reservation of LIHTC, an Applicant may request to
return its allocation and exchange it for an award of the same amount of credits from the next year.

For example, a 2025 awarded Project that receives a forward reservation of 2026 tax credits may upon
good cause swap those 2026 credits, if requested by March 31, 2026, for an allocation of 2027 credits.
This is necessary if the Project will not be placed in service by December 31, 2028, but instead will be
placed in service by December 31, 2029.

After LIHTCs have been returned, an Applicant may apply for additional LIHTCs. Projects must comply
with the requirements applicable in the initial year of award and all representations made in the initial
application (unless specifically and explicitly waived by OHCS).




Placed-In-Service Allocation Requirements
All LIHTC Applicants are required to complete a final application containing required documentation.
Any changes from the Equity Closing are subject to OHCS review and approval before the issuance of IRS
Form 8609. Projects with excess funds must return those funds to one or more of the public funders
upon Project completion. OHCS funding resources will have a priority for return upon the determination
of excess funds for the Project.

OHCS will accept and process final application documents and issue IRS Form 8609(s) throughout the
year. OHCS reserves the right to set a schedule for review and approval of 8609(s). Commercial costs
should be separated from the cost certification in an individual column or deducted from the total
residential costs. In either circumstance, the budget use pages should identify both components of cost
separately. However, a Project Owner must submit a complete application with all Placed-In-Service
documentation, including the independent Certified Public Accountant’s Report (Cost Certification) and
the certificates of occupancy for each building in the Project at least sixty (60) days prior to when the
Owner expects to receive the IRS Form 8609.

Upon completion of the Project, for 4% LIHTC Projects, the Borrower will provide to OHCS an analysis of
the breakdown of the bond-funded costs for the Project, to meet the federal tax requirements
described in the Project’s Tax Certificate and Agreement (or other similar document) in a form certified
by an authorized representative of the Borrower (commonly referred to as a “Good Costs

                                                                                                   23 |Page
                                            2025 Oregon QAP


Certificate”), together with more detailed backup information as requested by OHCS or Bond Counsel
for the State.



Project Changes
An Applicant must notify OHCS in writing of, and obtain its written consent to, any material changes ina
Project. An Applicant must notify OHCS when a material change is first identified. OHCS will endeavor to
respond within thirty (30) days after receiving the notice of a material change and request for consent.
OHCS may give or withhold its consent, or condition its consent, subject to its reasonable discretion. A
“material change” includes, but is not limited to, a change in:

1)   The number of buildings or units,

2)   The project contact person,

3)   The Identity of Interest disclosure,

4)   The development team,

5)   The project’s total project costs,

6)   A financing source (whether debt or equity),

7)   Operating revenue or expenses for the project of more than ten percent,

8)   Anything that would result in a change in the standards OHCS uses to evaluate projects,

9)   Changing the scope of the project, such as adding or subtracting buildings, square footage, units,
     and design elements that impact the budget and livability of tenants,

10) Changing project type and switching to a different intended tenant population,

11) Replacing sponsor and project ownership in a way that has a financial impact on the project,

12) Showing a gap, after funding approval and prior to closing and construction start, of more than 10
     percent of OHCS investment (exclusive of tax credits).

OHCS will determine whether a change in a project is substantial and triggers the requirement to return
the project to a previous step in the ORCA process. The written request for approval of a material
change in a Project must include a narrative description and other supporting documentation, plus the
applicable revised pages of the application. If OHCS grants the request, including as modified or
conditioned by OHCS, it may adjust the amount of the funding allocation to ensure the pro forma
“sources and uses” of the Project remain in balance.

Cost Savings Clause
Construction contracts that include any provision for cost savings that are to be retained by the general
contractor or split with the Project Applicant or Developer are not permitted. All ORCA-specific policies
related to cost savings apply to LIHTC.




                                                                                               24|Page
                                          2025 Oregon QAP


Project Transfer or Assignment Requiring OHCS Consent
A Project transfer or assignment requiring OHCS consent includes any direct or indirect sale,
contribution, assignment, lease, exchange, transfer, or other change in:

1)   Aninterest in the land, the Project, or any building,

2)   Anownership interest in the entity that is the Applicant or Project Owner,

3)   The rights, title, or interest of the Applicant or Project Owner in any agreement to which OHCS and
     the Applicant or Project Owner are parties,

The following transfers or assignments do not require the prior written consent of OHCS:

1)   The grant of a security interest or lien junior to the interest of OHCS, or

2)   The issuance, redemption, or transfer of stock or shares of a corporation that is not a closely held
     corporation.




Process and Requirement for Obtaining OHCS Consent
The first step in obtaining OHCS’s written consent to a Project transfer or assignment is to advise OHCS
in writing of the proposed transfer or assignment. At a minimum, the Applicant should describe:

1)   The name of the Project,

2)   The names of the Applicant and/or the Owner, the proposed transferor and transferee, and all other
     relevant parties,

3)   Acomplete description of the proposed transfer or assignment, including the proposed effective
     date, and

4)   Any special circumstances related to the proposed transfer or assignment.

After OHCS’s receipt of the written request, OHCS will advise the Applicant of OHCS’s requirements and
conditions that must be satisfied to obtain the consent, including payment of document preparation
charges and applicable legal fees. If the Applicant committed to participate under the set-aside category
for Qualified Non-Profit, any transfer or assignment must ensure that the Project continues to qualify for
such set-aside category.




Construction Closing
For 9% LIHTC transactions, the Applicant must give OHCS at least thirty (30) days’ written notice of the
scheduled Construction Closing. At least ten (10) days before the Construction Closing, but after the
general contractor bids have been received, the Applicant must submit to OHCS the Project’s final
development budget, final sources of funds, and documentation to substantiate the final budget.



                                                                                                 25|Page
                                          2025 Oregon QAP


For 4% LIHTC transactions, the Applicant must give OHCS the Project’s final development budget pro
forma, final sources of funds, and documentation to substantiate the final budget items at least ten (10)
days before submission to the OHCS Finance Committee for approval.



Market Study
Applicants must submit     a complete market analysis before receiving a 9% LIHTC or 4% LIHTC allocation.
The deadline for submission will be established within the Financial Eligibility step of the ORCA process
for projects selected for funding. Applicants should read and refer to the LIHTC Market Analysis
Guidelines for a full description of OHCS policies and guidelines. Selected projects must use approved
OHCS Market Analysts as required in code at IRC §42(m)(1)(A)(iii).

The Market Analysis Guidelines can be found at:
httos://www.oregon.gov/ohcs/developoment/Documents/admin/market-analysis-guidelines.pdf

The Approved Market Analyst List can be found at:
https://www.oregon.gov/ohcs/development/Documents/LIHTC/Approved-Market-Analysts-List-12-01-
21.pdf




Considerations

Reservation of Rights
Project/Request Denial. OHCS, in its sole discretion, may reject an application where the Applicant,
Owner, principal, consultant, or other participant concerning the proposed Project, previously has done
any of the following:


1)   Participated in a project that failed to complete a Project in accordance with requests or certified
     plans presented to OHCS or other public or private allocating agencies,

2)   Failed to complete a Project within the time schedule required or budget indicated in the request,

3)   Failed to effectively utilize previously allocated Program funds and was notified of such failure to
     meet appropriate utilization in advance of request or NOFA closing date,

4)   Participated in a Project that was found to be in non-compliance with Program     rules as evidenced by
     OHCS or other public or private Allocating Agency Project monitoring and missed the cure time
     deadline given in writing,

5)   Been debarred or otherwise sanctioned by OHCS or other state, federal or local governmental
     agency,

6)   Been convicted within the last ten (10) years of criminal fraud, misrepresentation, misuse of funds,
     or moral turpitude or currently is under indictment for such an offense,


                                                                                                 26|Page
                                          2025 Oregon QAP


7)   Been subject to a bankruptcy proceeding within the last five (5) years,

8)   Otherwise displayed an unwillingness or inability to comply with OHCS requirements,

OHCS reserves the right to disapprove any Application if, in OHCS’s judgment, the proposed Project is
not consistent with the goals of providing decent, safe and sanitary housing for low-income persons.
OHCS may impose additional conditions on Project Applicants for any Project as part of the application,
reservation or allocation processes.




Documentation            of Discretion

OHCS may, at its sole discretion, award credits in a manner not in accordance with the requirements of
the QAP. If any provision of this QAP (or documents incorporated herein by reference) is inconsistent
with any provisions (current or as amended) of IRC Section 42, corresponding Treasury Regulations, and
applicable IRS guidance, or any existing State Laws or State Administrative Rules governing the LIHTC
Program, the provisions of IRC Section 42, corresponding Treasury Regulations, and applicable IRS
guidance, state laws or state administrative rules take precedence over the QAP.




Policy on Exceptions/Waiver Requests
All OHCS policies, other than those mandated     by Section 42 of the Code, are considered as guidelines
and may be waived by OHCS at its sole discretion. A written request for a waiver or exception,
accompanied    by justification, may be submitted to OHCS. QAP waivers will be documented for all
Projects and regular periodic publications of waivers will identify the Applicant, the QAP provision
waived, and the reason for waiver. In addition, the summary for Projects recommended for funding may
identify and explain waivers granted for any Projects listed.

Applicants, lenders, or syndicators must submit any request for a waiver or exception to a policy in
writing with a full justification at least 30 days prior to the construction/equity closing date for
applications. Furthermore, OHCS reserves the right to waive any provision or requirement of the QAP
that is not stipulated in Section 42 of the Code in order to affirmatively further fair housing.

If OHCS acts contrary to or fails to act in accordance with this Plan, the ORCA, or any other Program
Requirement, such act or omission does not constitute a waiver by OHCS of any obligation on the part of
a Project, person or entity to comply with the provisions of this Plan, the ORCA, or other Program
Requirements, or establish a precedent for any other Project, person or entity. In any event, no waiver,
modification, or change of a requirement set forth in an OHCS Program Manual, or of any other Program
Requirement will be binding upon OHCS unless set forth in writing, signed by an authorized agent of
OHCS, and consistent with law.




Partial Invalidity
If any provision of this QAP, or the application of this Plan to any person or Project, is found by a court
to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this Plan, or the application of that provision to persons

                                                                                                   27|Page
                                            2025 Oregon QAP


or circumstances other than those with respect to which the provision was held invalid or unenforceable,
Shall not be affected. Each provision of the Plan shall be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent
permitted under State or federal law.




OHCS Sole Discretion
OHCS reserves the right to determine at application, reservation and/or at any point during the
underwriting process and at its sole discretion, whether the Third-Party Letters of Interest or Intent,
Award Letters, or Commitment Letters are satisfactory, and whether a lender or investor possesses the
financial or other capacity to make a specific loan or investment. A change in the Project’s financing
structure or financing terms after reservation of OHCS funds must be brought to the attention of OHCS.
OHCS may in its sole discretion re-underwrite the Project, which may result in all or a part of OHCS
resources being recaptured or reduced by, or returned to, OHCS.




Project/Request Denial
OHCS may reject an application where the Applicant, owner, principal, consultant, or other participant
with respect to the proposed Project, previously has:



1)   Participated in a Project that failed to complete Projects in accordance with requests or certified
     plans presented to OHCS or other public or private allocating agencies,

2)   Participated in a Project that failed to complete a Project within the time schedule required or
     budget indicated in the request,

3)   Participated in a Project that failed to effectively utilize previously allocated Program funds and was
     notified of such failure to meet appropriate utilization in advance of the request or ORCA cycle
     closing date,

4)   Participated in a Project that has been found to be in non-compliance with Program rules as
     evidenced by OHCS or other public or private Allocating Agency Project monitoring and missed the
     cure time deadline given in writing,

5)   Been debarred or otherwise sanctioned by OHCS or other state, federal or local governmental
     agency,

6)   Been convicted within the last ten (10) years of criminal fraud, misrepresentation, misuse of funds,
     or moral turpitude or currently is indicted for such an offense,

7)   Been subject to a bankruptcy proceeding within the last five (5) years,

8)   Otherwise displayed an unwillingness or inability to comply with OHCS requirements.

OHCS reserves the right to disapprove any application if, in OHCS’s judgment, the proposed Project is not
consistent with the goals of providing decent, safe, and sanitary housing for low-income       persons. OHCS



                                                                                                 28|Page
                                           2025 Oregon QAP


may impose additional conditions on Applicants for any Project as part of the application, reservation, or
allocation processes.




Financial Solvency

As part of the application and at such other times as required by OHCS, the Applicant must provide a
certification concerning the financial solvency of the Applicant, the Project, and certain Project
participants in the form required by OHCS.

If the certification discloses any financial difficulties, risks, or similar matters that OHCS believes in its
sole discretion might materially impair or harm the successful development and operation of the Project
as intended, OHCS may:

1)   Refuse to allow the Applicant or other participant to participate in the Tax Credit Program or other
     OHCS   Programs,

2)   Reject or disqualify an application and cancel any LIHTC reservation or allocation,

3)   Demand additional assurances that the development, ownership, operation, or management of the
     Project will not be impaired or harmed (such as performance bonds, pledging unencumbered assets
     as security, or such other assurances as determined by OHCS).




Take such other action as appropriate

The Applicant must also immediately disclose if there is a material change in the matters addressed in
the certification throughout the application process and throughout the development and operation of
the Project. Failure to do so may result in a loss of reservation.




Disclaimer
Issuance of a LIHTC reservation pursuant to a Reservation and Extended Use Agreement, a LIHTC
Carryover Allocation (Carryover) or a placed in service allocation as indicated by OHCS or the IRS Form
8609, shall not constitute or be construed as a representation or warranty as to the feasibility or viability
of the Project, or the Project's ongoing capacity for success, or any conclusion with respect to any
matter of federal or state income tax law. All LIHTC allocations are subject to the Code and
corresponding Treasury Regulations governing the LIHTC Program, and Applicants are responsible for
the determination of a Project’s eligibility and compliance. If statements in this QAP are in conflict with
Section 42 of the Code and corresponding Treasury Regulations, the Code and such regulations shall
take precedence. While this QAP and the applicable ORCA processes govern OHCS’s process of allocating
LIHTC, Applicants may not rely upon this QAP as an interpretation of IRS Code requirements.


No executive, employee or agent of OHCS, or of any other agency of the State, or any official of the


                                                                                                     29|Page
                                          2025 Oregon QAP


State, including the Governor, shall be personally liable concerning any matters arising out of, or in
relation to, the allocation of the State’s LIHTC allocation, or the approval or administration of this QAP.

Lenders and investors should consult with their own tax or investment counsel to determine whether a
Project qualifies for LIHTCs, or whether an investor may use the LIHTCs, or whether any Project is
commercially feasible.




Violations
OHCS may exercise any of the Remedies described below if:

1)   The Applicant fails to comply with any Program Requirement including, but not limited to, the timely
     payment of charges and fees and the execution and recording of documents satisfactory to OHCS,

2)   OHCS determines the Applicant or other Program participant made a material misrepresentation,
     affirmatively or by omission,

3)   OHCS determines the Applicant or other Program participant is debarred from accessing Program
     resources or otherwise is not a qualifying Applicant, or

4)   The Applicant, Owner, or other Program participant defaults with respect to any Program
     Requirement or obligation to OHCS.

OHCS will have no duty, obligation, or liability to the Applicant, the lender, the tax credit investor, or
other related Program participant for exercising such remedies. Applicant and related Program
participants, including lenders and tax credit equity investors, expressly waive any claims, causes of
action or other remedies against OHCS with respect to a disqualification, cancellation, or modification as
described above as a condition of Applicant’s filing of its application or their participation in the
Program.




Remedies
In the event of any failure to adhere to the terms of this Plan or any Program     Requirements, including as
described above in the Violations section, OHCS may elect to pursue any and all remedies available to it
under the Program     Requirements,    including executed   documents,   or otherwise   available to it at law.
These remedies include, but are not limited to:

1)   Cancellation of an application,

2)   Revocation or modification of an Allocation Credit or other award of OHCS resources,

3)   Debarment of person or entity from accessing OHCS Programs,

4)   Recoupment of allocated or disbursed resources,

5)   Specific enforcement,

6)   Actions for direct, indirect, consequential, or punitive damages,

                                                                                                  30|Page
                                          2025 Oregon QAP


7)   Appointment of a Project receiver,

8)   Foreclosure of secured interests.

Furthermore, OHCS may, and specifically reserves the right to, modify, waive, or postpone any restrictive
covenants or equitable servitudes with respect to the Project or any part thereof.

No Third-Party Liability: Nothing in the Program Requirements is intended, or shall be construed, to
create a duty or obligation of OHCS to enforce any term or provision of the Program Requirements or
exercise any remedy on behalf of, at the request of, or for the benefit of, any former, present, or
prospective resident. OHCS assumes no direct or indirect obligation or liability to any former, present, or
prospective resident for violations by the Applicant,   Owner or any other Program   participant.




Effective Date
This Qualified Allocation Plan shall be effective upon its approval and execution by the Governor and
shall remain in effect indefinitely or until modified or terminated.




                                                                                                31|Page
                                           2025 Oregon QAP

Appendix A: Enhanced Accessibility Standards
Enhanced Accessibility Standards
Checklist for use with the QAP

Projects seeking the LIHTC incentives connected with this checklist must comply with Enhanced
Accessibility principles listed in the table below.

Use of the terms “Accessibility” and “Accessible” in this document acknowledges that accessibility is a
fundamental element of Universal Design.       The required elements in this checklist benefit all users
regardless of their needs.

New     Construction
New Construction projects must complete the Mandatory items listed in table NC1. Place checkmark
after each item being committed to for the subject project.

  Table NC1
  Mandatory Items for New Construction
  No|       JY _ | Mandatory Items
  01        O     Design team will conduct at least one accessible design strategy workshop at the
                  beginning of Schematic Design. This workshop must be designed to orient the design
                  team to accessible/universal/inclusive design possibilities for the project.   The
                  workshop must be facilitated by accessibility/universal/inclusive design expert or
                  trained professional. The workshop may be integrated with other development team
                  collaborative work sessions.

                  The following brief report on the Accessibility Workshop must be submitted during the
                  Financial Eligibility Phase of the ORCA which includes the following information:
                  a) The date the workshop was held.
                   b) A basic description of how the workshop was conducted
                  c) The name of the primary facilitator of the workshop and the name of their
                        organization.
                   d)   Key members of the development team that were in attendance, their roles on the
                        project, and the names of their organizations.

                  A brief summary of the Universal Design (UD) / Inclusive Design (ID) strategies and
                  goals for the project. UD/ID strategies and goals that are standard practice for the
                  project team should be included in this summary. Because Accessibility is being
                  prescribed by this requirement, this UD/ID Summary is intended to focus more on
                  UD/ID thinking that may be integrated into the project, however the summary may
                  include Accessibility related enhancements that may not be prescribed under item 02
                  of Table NC-1.

  02        O     Project must achieve equivalency with ADA Title II Accessibility Requirements. OHCS
                  funding program participants should refer to Section 233 of the 2010 ADA Standards
                  for Accessible Design | ADA.gov which defines the scoping and technical requirements
                  under this standard.



                                                                                                   32 |Page
                             2025 Oregon QAP

     In addition, the scoping requirements given in Section 233.3.1.1 and 233.3.1.2 of
     the above referenced standard are doubled for the purposes of achieving eligibility
     for the funding incentives connected with the requirements listed in this Table.
     This means that projects must make 10% of the dwelling units fully accessible for
     mobility impaired persons and 4% of the dwelling units must include
     “communication” design elements as prescribed in Section 233 of the ADA
     Standard for Accessible Design.

     If more than 10% of dwelling units are designed to achieve ADA Title Il Accessibility
     Requirements, the additional Accessible units will count towards achieving
     compliance with item 03 of this Table.


03   In addition to the units satisfying item 02, a minimum of 20% (rounded up to the next
     whole unit; for example, a project with 11 total units would require 2 Type A units, a
     project with 41 total units would require 8 Type A units, etc.) of the dwelling units must
     comply with ICC A177.1 Type A unit requirements.     All projects must have at least one
     Type A unit.


04   All units meet or exceed CDM v 3.1 Unit Size minimum requirements per Chapter 6.1,
     Item N15.01. Project is not eligible for Variance Requests to reduce this requirement.


O5   All dwelling units meet CDM v3.1 Clothes Washer and Dryer requirements per Chapter
     6.1, Item N18.01. Project is not eligible for Variance Requests to reduce this
     requirement.




                                                                                    33 |Page
                                                             2025 Oregon QAP



Appendix B: Public Comments and Responses
Submitter      Organizatio   Issue            Comments & Feedback                                                   OHCS Response
               n
Martin Leung   BRIDGE        Preservation-    We concur with OHCS goals to balance rural and urban                We believe even with the automatic
                             Rural            projects and recommend establishing a 20% set-aside rather          qualification of rural expiring projects as
                                              than automatically ranking all rural projects as critical priority. "Critical" priority that we will still have a
                                              As currently written, this may result in a funding round where — mix of rural and urban projects.
                                              only rural projects are funded and all urban projects are
                                              excluded regardless of their ability to meet OHCS goals for
                                              affordability or potential impact to tenants. For example, a
                                              rural project with no vulnerable households and rents similar
                                              to market-rate may inadvertently receive funding over an
                                              urban project that has substantially discounted rents and
                                              highly vulnerable residents.

Martin Leung   BRIDGE        Preservation-    We concur with OHCS’s draft guideline to limit eligibility to         We are considering how we will support
                             Definition for   properties that are expiring within the next seven years and          acquisition efforts where a preservation-
                             Risk of Loss     recommend expanding the definition of risk of loss to include       | motivated buyer has purchased a
                                              properties that are currently in contract or have been                property with short-term financing.
                                              acquired by nonprofits or Public Housing Authorities (PHAs)
                                              from for-profit sellers in the past 5 years.
Martin Leung   BRIDGE        Preservation-    A 5-year look back limit on nonprofit or PHA ownership can            We are considering how we will support
                             Definition for   better meet OHCS’ intention to prevent nonprofits and PHAs            acquisition efforts where a preservation-
                             Risk of Loss     from utilizing limited Preservation funds to recapitalize their       motivated buyer has purchased a
                                              existing portfolio with expiring regulatory agreements, rather        property with short-term financing.
                                              than acquiring properties for preservation.




                                                                                                                                                    34|Page
                                                       2025 Oregon QAP

Martin Leung   BRIDGE   Preservation-   We recommend modifying the definition to be based on the         We continue to look for ways to evaluate
                        Affordability   actual difference between market-rate rents and weighted         potential negative impact to tenants, and
                        Relative to     average in-place rents at the property. In addition, we          will consider this metric the next time we
                        Market          recommend prioritizing properties based on the level of          revise criteria.
                                        discount versus market-rate rents.




Martin Leung   BRIDGE   Preservation-   Affordability is more accurately measured with the actual in-    We continue to look for ways to evaluate
                        Affordability   place rents paid by residents rather than regulatory rent        potential negative impact to tenants, and
                        Relative to     limits as many properties have rents lower than the rent limit   will consider this metric the next time we
                        Market          due to the State rent stabilization law and OHCS rent increase   revise criteria.
                                        policy.




Martin Leung   BRIDGE   Preservation-   In some submarkets, due to decline in rents or oversupply,       We continue to look for ways to evaluate
                        Affordability   market-rate rents may be below 50% AMI rent limits and thus      potential negative impact to tenants, and
                        Relative to     offer no affordability to residents. Conversely, in stronger     will consider this metric the next time we
                        Market          submarkets with access to high-quality schools, parks, and       revise criteria.
                                        other amenities, 60% AMI rent limits can be significantly
                                        lower than market rents. As currently written, a property that
                                        offers no discount to market-rate rents may be prioritized
                                        over a property that offers 10-20% discount to market rents.




                                                                                                                                        35|Page
                                                       2025 Oregon QAP

Martin Leung   BRIDGE   Preservation-   Applicants can provide market-rate rents as part of ORCA              We continue to look for ways to evaluate
                        Affordability   application, subject to existing OHCS market analysis                 potential negative impact to tenants, and
                        Relative to     guidelines                                                            will consider this metric the next time we
                        Market                                                                                revise criteria.




Martin Leung   BRIDGE   Preservation-   We recommend      prioritizing projects with 40% or more              We continue to look for ways to evaluate
                        Impact to       vulnerable households as critical priority and 20% or more as         potential negative impact to tenants, and
                        Tenant          high priority to better differentiate critical versus high priority   will consider this metric the next time we
                                        projects.                                                             revise criteria.




Martin Leung   BRIDGE   Preservation    As currently written in the Preservation guidelines,                  We continue to look for ways to evaluate
                        Tiebreakers     community need is based on the number of Affordable                   potential negative impact to tenants, and
                                        Housing Units Per Low Income Households (60%MFI) in a                 will consider this metric the next time we
                                        census tract. Most census tracts in the State have no                 revise criteria.
                                        affordable housing units making this an ineffective tiebreaker.
                                        In addition, some census tracts may be incorrectly
                                        characterized as low community need due to anomalies in
                                        census tract boundaries and affordable housing properties
                                        that may be located on the outermost portion of a census
                                        tract.




                                                                                                                                             36 |
                                                        2025 Oregon QAP

Martin Leung   BRIDGE   Preservation-    As currently written, nonprofits and PHAs would be                We understand acquisition is risky and
                        Definition for   incentivized to acquire properties only when OHCS has             difficult, and we need to prioritize
                        Risk of Loss     funding available through ORCA and would be discouraged           funding in a way that's transparent and
                                         from acquiring an at-risk property even if they have access to    defensible.
                                         short-term acquisition financing from third parties.
                                         Nonprofits and PHAs typically do not have long-term capital
                                         for preservation but many have access to short-term
                                         acquisition loans that allows for a faster close and enables
                                         them to be competitive with for-profit buyers with timely
                                         access to acquisition capital.


Martin Leung   BRIDGE   Preservation     We recommend using subsidy requested per unit as the              Tiebreakers have been revised to remove
                        Tiebreakers      second tiebreaker to encourage cost efficient acquisitions        rent burden and substitute one based on
                                         that reflect fair market value and discourage above-market        market-rate rents.
                                         acquisitions. We also recommend replacing rent burden with
                                         the affordability relative to market as a tiebreaker and using
                                         the same tiebreakers between the Preservation program and
                                         Qualified Allocation Plan.




Martin Leung   BRIDGE   Preservation     As currently written in the Qualified Allocation Plan, rent       Tiebreakers have been revised to remove
                        Tiebreakers      burden in the census tract is used as a second tiebreaker and     rent burden and substitute one based on
                                         we believe affordability relative to market is a better measure   market-rate rents.
                                         of burden since it is based on actual in-place rents versus
                                         market rents. Since this metric is already used to prioritize
                                         projects, we recommend using this as a third tiebreaker
                                         rather than second tiebreaker




                                                                                                                                           37|Page
                                                        2025 Oregon QAP

Martin Leung   BRIDGE   Preservation-    As currently written, the definition excludes all properties      Nonprofits and PHAs are still eligible for
                        Definition for   owned by nonprofits and PHAs regardless of acquisition date,    | funding under the other preservation
                        Risk of Loss     which inadvertently discourages and disincentivizes these         categories.
                                         entities from pursuing preservation activities. This does not
                                         align with OHCS policy to grow the capacity of nonprofits,
                                         PHAs, Culturally Specific Organizations, and Culturally
                                         Responsive Organizations.




Martin Leung   BRIDGE   Preservation-    As currently written, a for-profit buyer is eligible for         We don't exclude for-profit partners who
                        Definition for   Preservation funding for at-risk expiring properties which       commit to OHCS goals and requirements.
                        Risk of Loss     does not align with OHCS goal of supporting nonprofits and
                                         PHAs to acquire properties from for-profits to prevent
                                         displacement of low-income households.




                                                                                                                                           38 | Page
                                                                 2025 Oregon QAP

Martin Leung    BRIDGE       Preservation-    Regulatory restrictions for properties that nonprofits and          Understood and thank you for your
                             Definition for   PHAs recently acquired from for-profits remain at-risk of
                             Risk of Loss     expiration as there is no legal requirement for regulatory
                                              agreements to be extended. Without preservation funding
                                              from OHCS, nonprofits and PHAs may have no choice but to
                                              consider selling at-risk assets and recoup limited capital to
                                              redeploy it towards other mission-aligned and financially
                                              feasible projects.

Martin Leung    BRIDGE                        We recommend a Clarification in the note that the ownership         Thank you for your feedback.
                                              and expiration period is measured from the date of the ORCA
                                              intake application




Shelly Cullin   Chrisman     Preservation     | would just like to verify that for preservation projects, OHCS    This is correct.
                Developmen                    allows the 30% basis boost for 9%, but it is not eligible for 4%,
                t                             is that correct.




                                                                                                                                                 39|Page
                                                        2025 Oregon QAP

Ellen Meyi-   City of   Tiebreakers,     Pg 16, Line 24, It is not clear what ‘significant’ federal HOME     Yes, it will be defined as a minimum of
Galloway      Eugene    PJs              funds means. Is there a specific dollar amount that would be      | $100,000. The intent is to maximally
                                         ‘significant’ ?                                                     leverage federal subsidies. Related to the
                                                                                                             QAP for 9% LIHTC project selection, we
                                                                                                             have expanded our tie-breakers to
                                                                                                             include projects that have local HOME, or
                                                                                                             Community Development Block Grant
                                                                                                             Funds (CDBG), Tax Increment Finance, or
                                                                                                             another OHCS-approved place-based
                                                                                                             economic development fund that is
                                                                                                             awarded for gap funding by Participating
                                                                                                             Jurisdictions in lieu of HOME,   in an effort
                                                                                                             to support alignment with funding
                                                                                                             partners seeking to utilize time-sensitive
                                                                                                             leveraged funds.
Ellen Meyi-   City of   Supplemental     Pg 15, Line 27, Right now it seems that because of the              OHCS does not require a project to come
Galloway      Eugene    Criteria,        uncertainty of ORCA funding/ timing, it may make more sense _       in at any point in time, just that they are
                        Responsive to _ for projects to be in the ORCA process on the Waitlist before        ready to proceed once they begin the
                        Tenant/Comm — applying for HOME funds or other local subsidies. However,             process. As always, state funding is
                        unity Needs     that means local governments would need to defer to State            contingent on available resources in the
                                        priorities instead of local governments prioritizing                 same way that it always has been, but
                                         development proposals meeting community needs.                      timing for when   projects come to us to
                                                                                                             apply for that funding is more flexible
                                                                                                             than it has ever been.

Ellen Meyi-   City of   Supplemental    Pg 15, Line 27, The listed items under this supplemental             The ORCA contains mandatory standards
Galloway      Eugene    Criteria,       criteria does not speak to specific local needs determined by        around community engagement, as well
                        Responsive to | the community itself. How would the QAP support                      as components of the project resulting
                        Tenant/Comm _ responsiveness to local priorities in the ORCA intake phase?           from that engagement that is responsive
                        unity Needs      This question applies to all of ORCA, not just the QAP/ LIHTC.    | to the needs expressed through that
                                                                                                             engagement,    including resident services
                                                                                                             and project design.




                                                                                                                                              40|Page
                                                           2025 Oregon QAP

Ellen Meyi-   City of      Tiebreakers,     Pg 16, Line 24, For this tiebreaker, how will OHCS identify if a     It is OHCS's intent to confirm with
Galloway      Eugene       PJs              development proposal has a legitimate local subsidy award or         Participating Jurisdictions whether
                                            recommendation for award, or if the developers just                  funding awards have been recommended
                                            indicated HOME funds in their proposed financing (but the            for projects claiming that resource in
                                            local jurisdiction did not award    HOME   funds)?   We propose      their applications.
                                            OHCS communicate with local jurisdictions about which
                                            development proposals were awarded or recommended             for
                                            local subsidy awards.
Ellen Meyi-   City of      Tiebreakers,     Pg 16, Line 24, Jurisdictions have other funds besides HOME          OHCS will expand this definition to
Galloway      Eugene       PJs              in development proposals that we would also want to                  include all federal resources that may
                                            prioritize such as HOME-ARP,       Construction Excise Tax revenue   otherwise be lost if not utilized.
                                            (called Affordable Housing Trust Funds in Eugene), and other
                                            resources. We propose that the tiebreaker says something
                                            like ‘Participating Jurisdiction: local investment such as HOME
                                            funds or other subsidies.
Jessica       Community    Preservation     Pg 17, Line 19, 2 years is not sufficient time to ensure a           The full definition of our priorities for this
Woodruff      Developmen   Risk of Loss     project is preserved. It can often take 5+ years to ensure a         preservation category includes projects
              t Partners   Federal PBRA     recapitalization/renovation. Projects within 10 years should         expiring within the next seven years. For
                                            be eligible to apply.                                                the preservation projects in this LIHTC
                                                                                                                 round we are focusing on the critical
                                                                                                                 priority of projects at imminent risk of
                                                                                                                 loss.




Jessica       Community    Preservation     Pg 17, Line 22, is there a year threshold on this Project            Yes, this category is limited to projects
Woodruff      Developmen   Risk of Loss     Criteria area?                                                       where the latest affordability restrictions
              t Partners   Expiration and                                                                        expire within seven years.
                           Conversion




                                                                                                                                                  41 |
                                                      2025 Oregon QAP

Mariana    Consultant   Conduit Bond   The IRS limits such fees as per IRC Section 148 -                  Our proposal follows all IRS limits, and
Crawford                Charges        https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p5005.pdf                          has been vetted and approved by our
                                                                                                          financial advisors.   The proposed charges
                                                                                                          are under what the agency is legally
                                                                                                          allowed to charge in terms of “full
                                                                                                          spread” from what the IRS allows under
                                                                                                          current tax law. For certain structures like
                                                                                                          short-term draws, related parties and re-
                                                                                                          issuances, we will work with our advisors
                                                                                                          (bond counsel, financial advisors, our
                                                                                                          internal debt management team) to get
                                                                                                          as close to the present value of this
                                                                                                          charge as possible, which might require
                                                                                                          different calculations.
Mariana    Consultant   Tiebreakers    Pg 16, please reconsider tiebreakers that are quantifiable in      Thank you for this feedback. The intent is
Crawford                               advance of the competitive process. Please remove the              to maximally leverage federal subsidies.
                                       leverage of federal HOME funds, as many counties are reliant       Related to the QAP for 9% LIHTC project
                                       on OHCS as their PJ and have no access to HOME funds ona           selection, we have expanded our tie-
                                       regular basis. A tie breaker should be relevant and applicable     breakers to include projects that have
                                       to all projects equitably across the state. Likewise, we           local HOME, or Community Development
                                       recommend removal of efficient unit production as a tie            Block Grant Funds (CDBG), Tax Increment
                                       breaker since this is not a number that can be easily              Finance, or another OHCS-approved
                                       determined before the application is submitted, thus relying       place-based economic development fund
                                       on accurate calculations by OHCS.                                  that is awarded for gap funding by
                                                                                                          Participating Jurisdictions in lieu of
                                                                                                          HOME, in an effort to support alignment
                                                                                                          with funding partners seeking to utilize
                                                                                                          time-sensitive leveraged funds.
Mariana    Consultant   Conduit Bond   OHCS’s fees are competitively priced, when compared to             Some of the state HFA issuers that we
Crawford                Charges        similar sized issuers throughout the country. OHCS’s fees are      looked at include Washington,    DC,
                                       not the lowest for an issuer of its size and sole de facto state   California, Rhode Island, South Dakota
                                       issuer of conduit bonds. Further, the complexity of issuance       and Colorado. All of these states have
                                       has not dramatically changed since 2019. Page 14 of the            both an issuance charge and an annual
                                       study identifies state level issuer fees range between $250-       ongoing charge. We do believe that the
                                       $7,500 for state-level issuers; and $1,500-$3,000 for issuers      complexity of bond issuance has changed
                                       with authority in multiple states, of which OHCS is not.           since 2019: larger issuances, more
                                                                                                          complex structures, and increases in the
                                                                                                          fees OHCS pays to legal/financial advisors.


                                                                                                                                          42 |
                                                      2025 Oregon QAP

Mariana    Consultant   Additional     Pg 13, Additional Process Information needs substantial              OHCS is statutorily required to have any
Crawford                Process        revision. Please note competitive funding should not be              funding award in excess of $1,000,000
                        Information    subject to Housing Stability Council, but to a competitive           approved by our Housing Stability
                                       process that is objective, quantifiable and replicable before        Council. Frameworks are approved prior
                                       and after submission of application such that it results in the      to funding availability, and Housing
                                       same outcome.                                                        Stability Council approves those with the
                                                                                                            expectation that OHCS staff will conduct a
                                                                                                            process and project application reviews in
                                                                                                            alignment with those approved
                                                                                                            standards.
Mariana    Consultant   Conduit Bond   On the issue of the Conduit Bond Charges, we propose you             Thank you for sharing the CDFA survey -
Crawford                Charges        leave these unchanged until the next QAP for the following           we did use this document in our analysis.
                                       reasons: There have not been industry wide reasons to                This study is not specific to housing
                                       increase any of these fees, to the degree OHCS proposes.       The   agencies (state or otherwise), and
                                       Council of Development Finance Agencies (CDFA)’s 2019                includes other types of conduit bonds,
                                       survey remains the most comprehensive study in response to           including hospital, student loan and
                                       the effect of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 ((TCJA) on the       industrial development bonds, which we
                                       conduit bond industry. That study indicated 82% of issuers           found hard to compare to OHCS
                                       charge an initial issue fee, with 61% of issuers charging an         multifamily conduit bonds.
                                       application fee. ( see CDFA study herein linked) The reason
                                       the issue has not been as thoroughly researched since 2019 is
                                       that there have been no changes in the market as impactful
                                       as TCJA.




                                                                                                                                           43|Page
                                                     2025 Oregon QAP

Mariana    Consultant   LIHTC/ORCA    PAGE 5, row 8 (4%) and row 13 (9%), ORCA and the tax credit       Subsidy layering review will still happen
Crawford                Integration   program should remain independent from each other by              as part of the ORCA process during the
                                      continuing to use of the well-established doctrine of the         Financial Eligibility step. The ORCA was
                                      subsidy layering review (SLR), by fully funding each project at   developed with substantial public
                                      a level that “is not more than necessary.” (please refer to the   engagement and in conjunction with our
                                      Federal Register Administrative Guidelines: Subsidy Layering      governing body, the Housing Stability
                                      Review for Project-Based Vouchers)    While gap funding may       Council. The intent was always to
                                      be needed by LIHTC funded projects, the controlling doctrine      integrate tax credits into the ORCA
                                      should remain SLR, not ORCA. SLR has been an important            process.
                                      component of affordable housing finance funding for several
                                      decades. SLR emerged as a response to concerns about the
                                      efficient use of public funds in affordable housing
                                      development. Its primary purpose is to ensure that
                                      government assistance is not excessive and that projects
                                      receive only the necessary amount of subsidy to make them
                                      viable. SLPR emerged in 1990 with the Cranston-Gonzalez
                                      National Affordable Housing Act of 1990 and was
                                      subsequently affirmed through the HOME program
                                      implementation, the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of
                                      2008 (HERA), the 2013 HOME     Final Rule and most recently,
                                      the Project-Based Voucher (PBV) Program through the
                                      February 2020 updated guidelines. OHCS has a long history of
                                      practicing the SLR doctrine and should continue to do so
                                      through the ORCA process in such a way as to clearly be able
                                      to support the delivery of affordable housing without creating
                                      confusion and delay.




                                                                                                                                        44|Page
                                                        2025 Oregon QAP

Mariana    Consultant   Conduit Bond     While the context points to the Chelsea Decision (see 23rd        Thank you for this comment - we agree
Crawford                Charges          Chelsea Associates LLC v. Commissioner of Internal Revenue)       that Oregon faces a housing and
                                         as a reason for increasing fees (because they can be included     homelessness crisis that demands action
                                         in basis) we believe this reasoning short sighted at a time       and innovation. All charges collected go
                                         when Oregon ranks 3rd (google search) or 8th (according to        back into OHCS' mission to provide stable
                                         12/28/24 WW article) in the nation for people experiencing        and affordable housing and consider how
                                         homelessness; and first in the nation for unsheltered             to make our funding streams and
                                         homelessness among families with children. The time for           resources more sustainable.
                                         OHCS to raise its fees is not when the fees can be included in
                                         basis thus increasing the cost of each unit of housing, but
                                         when OHCS becomes the market maker in delivering its
                                         resources to developers such that Oregon homelessness is at
                                         the bottom 25% of the national pack. Until then, all funds
                                         should be directed toward the delivery of units.
Mariana    Consultant   Rural            Pg 9, Row 20, Rural is not defined in the QAP except by           OHCS has received significant negative
Crawford                Definition       reference to ORCA. We suggest that OHCS define rural in line      feedback in the past for using multiple
                                         with the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) which is tasked      definitions of rural for different programs.
                                         with, among other things, providing affordable housing            Our research team did significant
                                         support in rural areas across the country. As such, rural         research into best practices and data
                                         projects should be any building that meet the USDA rural          used nationally and arrived at the
                                         eligibility per the USDA multifamily eligibility map at:          definition being used now.
                                         https://eligibility.sc.egov.usda.gov/eligibility/welcomeAction.
                                         do?pageAction=sfp. The map is simple to use. If an address is
                                         eligible for USDA affordable housing programs, then it should
                                         also be recognized as Rural according to OHCS and eligible for
                                         9% credit priority funding.
Mariana    Consultant   Re-Evaluation    Pg 10, Row 17-21, we suggest removal of this section as it has    OHCS needs standards to be met related
Crawford                of Reservation   the high potential of creating instability which will result in   to timelines and if they cannot, must
                                         reduced credit pricing for Oregon tax credit projects against     reserve the right to re-evaluate the
                                         what is likely to be a highly competitive credit pricing market   reservation. The state does not provide
                                         in 2025-2026. Oregon is not a market that leads credit pricing.   awards of funding with no ability to
                                         And both developers and investors need the predictability not     rescind if expectations are not being met.
                                         being repriced and re-traded.




                                                                                                                                           45 |
                                                       2025 Oregon QAP

Mariana    Consultant   Returned/Unu   Pg 10, Row 6, Please define the word      “active” — it is unclear    The 9% LIHTC projects will have a
Crawford                sed LIHTC      what this means. Projects are only active if there is sufficient      different process for selection than
                        Allocation     transparency to understand what makes a project active,               projects seeking other resources. We will
                        Authority      such as its rank on the waitlist, only in so far as the waitlist is   rephrase from waitlist to better reflect
                                       published.                                                            the intent here, which is ranking order for
                                                                                                             the current open 9% round.




Mariana    Consultant   Basis Boost    Pg 9, Row 22 & 23, We take issue with the word “goals” —              OHCS used the word goals in an attempt
Crawford                Criteria       please replace with units — tax payer dollars should not be           to expand beyond simply the creation of
                                       spent on goals, but concrete units. The basis boost should be         units but the wraparound support of
                                       available to project that commit to some minimum number               tenants that is a requirement of the PSH
                                       or percentage of permanent supportive housing units.                  model. We understand the confusion and
                                                                                                             will seek better framing.




Mariana    Consultant   LIHTC/ORCA     PAGE 5, row 8 (4%) and row 13 (9%), In funding affordable             This is one of the intents of the ORCA - for
Crawford                Integration    housing projects, OHCS must take the lead by fully funding            OHCS to have a better understanding of
                                       projects without unnecessarily creating a gap to be filled by         the full financing needs of a project and
                                       ORCA sources. From a development perspective, the fewer               be able to support a project achieve a
                                       sources of funding, either federal, state or both within a            capital stack that gets them there.
                                       project’s capital stack results 2 things: 1. a viable project that
                                       will expediently deliver units; and, 2. a project assisted by
                                       total sources in an amount that ‘is not more than necessary’
                                       to make the project feasible when considering all other
                                       government assistance, if any are necessary.




                                                                                                                                             46|Page
                                                           2025 Oregon QAP

Mariana    Consultant   Universal           Please define universal design standards. Like our many          Based on similar feedback, OHCS is
Crawford                Design              colleagues, we practice and are supportive of advancing          replacing "Universal Design" with
                        Standards           accessibility through design. For a working definition, we       "Enhanced Accessibility." OHCS has also
                        definition          suggest you start with adherence to the Federal Fair Housing     included specific requirements to meet
                                            Act, which requires seven universal design features in           this standard.
                                            residential buildings built after 1991 for projects of four or
                                            more units, along with compliance with the Americans with
                                            Disabilities Act (ADA) which establishes minimum
                                            requirements for accessible built environment design and
                                            construction
Mariana    Consultant   9%/ORCA             PAGE 5, row 8 (4%) and row 13 (9%), 9% credits are               One of the critical updates to the QAP
Crawford                Integration         competitive credits and ORCA is not a competitive process.       was the development of a competitive
                                            Please revise the QAP to reflect a competitive process that      selection process for 9% LIHTC projects
                                            reflects the requirements of competitiveness as required by      that can be used within the ORCA
                                            Section 42 of the IRC.                                           process.




Mariana    Consultant   Returned/           Pg 10, Row 10-12, please revise to reflect relevance to the      The information outlined in the QAP
Crawford                Unused      LIHTC   competitiveness of credits, as this is just a description of     explains that the 9% LIHTC project
                        Allocation          internal practices. As a forward allocating agency, this         selection process meets the Section 42
                        Authority           practice is the only viable action to be taken.                  requirements for competition.




                                                                                                                                             47 |
                                                        2025 Oregon QAP

Mariana    Consultant   Returned/Unu     Pg 10, Row 13-14, we suggest deletion of this statement as it       | OHCS disagrees with this assertion, as
Crawford                sed LIHTC        results in incoherent action in a competitive environment.           competition does occur within distinct set
                        Allocation                                                                            aside categories.
                        Authority




Mariana    Consultant   Tax Credit Pay   Pg 18, Row 30, we suggest removal of tax credit pay in               We have removed the tax credit equity
Crawford                In Schedules     schedules, as this will result in lower tax credit pricing across     pay in schedule.
                                         all Oregon projects.




Mariana    Consultant   Basis Boost      Pg 9, Row 28 & 29, May we suggest revision of #8) to support        | We will consider for the next QAP update.
Crawford                Criteria         housing in cities and counties that have not had an
                                         investment of LIHTC in the last 5 years or have not been able
                                         to get funding of more than 40 units in the last 3 years.




                                                                                                                                             48|Page
                                                   2025 Oregon QAP

Traci      HDC NW   Material        | counted 5 references in various places in the QAP to clarify   OHCS has standardized the definition for
Manning             Change          what happens if something changes and some of them can be        material change throughout the
(Public             (expansion on   pretty punitive like if project costs change. Well, of course,   document.   It is intended to not be
Hearing)            above written   project costs are going to change, and they are also             punitive for expected fluctuations in cost
                    comment)        inconsistent throughout the document. So performance             or minor project updates as projects
                                    guidelines. There's kind of a list of what might you know what   move through the ORCA, but also creates
                                    you need, what changes you need to report on page 10.            a reasonability standard by which
                                    There's reevaluation has a definition, reevaluation of a         projects must be far enough along in the
                                    reservation on page 12. There's a definition of substantial      planning process to be committing to the
                                    changes which is kind of similar. On page 14 there's a           project characteristics that they are
                                    paragraph about reconsideration again very similar. Under        claiming at Impact Assessment and able
                                    what circumstances is there reconsideration? And then, on        to move quickly after funding approval by
                                    page 24, there's a section labeled project changes again, a      HSC after that step. This helps sponsors
                                    similar but not exactly the same list. So for the purposes of    from potentially taking advantage of the
                                    clarity, transparency, simplicity really encourage that we       rolling nature of the ORCA to move
                                    create one definition of what is considered a substantial        projects forward without actually being
                                    change. And what happens if there's a substantial change that    ready.
                                    allows for some cushion, right? Because you don't want to
                                    trap yourself into having to waive a rule. And you know, as we
                                    all talk about as a group, a lot, uncertainty is really not
                                    desirable in development. The lenders hate it, the investors
                                    hate it, we hate it. And having these really rigid sort of
                                    process rules around what happens if something changes
                                    introduces the potential for a lot of uncertainty that | don't
                                    think you intend to. | know we don't want. And so we'll, I'll
                                    submit some specific ideas for trying to use the same
                                    language for all those different things, and trying to make
                                    them real to the process. Certainly, if a project has gone
                                    sideways we don't want to waste any allocation and have that
                                    understanding of how a good project a project you want to
                                    fund will change over time and at least consolidate some of
                                    those 5 different sections.




                                                                                                                                     49 |
                                                2025 Oregon QAP

Traci     HDC NW   9%            Early childhood education centers and PSH are both more           There have a been a number of very
Manning            Tiebreakers   difficult to achieve in rural settings.                           successful projects in rural Oregon to go
                                                                                                   through OHCS's PSH Institute and create
                                                                                                   successful projects that are currently
                                                                                                   housing chronically homeless individuals
                                                                                                   and families. OHCS has also recently
                                                                                                   conducted a study showing the urgent
                                                                                                   need for more childcare facilities in rural
                                                                                                   Oregon and there are examples of models
                                                                                                   that will work in those communities, as
                                                                                                   well as case studies, within that study
                                                                                                   that is also on our website.
Traci     HDC NW   9%            We acknowledge that having some guardrails for cost per unit      OHCS understands the concerns around
Manning            Tiebreakers   is important. However, using lowest tax credit allocation per     this criterion but also must balance the
                                 unit in addition to those limits has some undesirable             need for stewardship of public resources
                                 consequences.                                                     and need to make the most efficient
                                                                                                   investments possible to get the most
                                                                                                   from the limited amount of credits
                                                                                                   available. This tiebreaker has been
                                                                                                   lowered on the list but is still an
                                                                                                   important consideration.

Traci     HDC NW   9%            A preference for number of units produced over number of          OHCS understands the concerns around
Manning            Tiebreakers   people housed. Smaller units are less expensive to build and      this criterion but also must balance the
                                 use less tax credits, but house fewer people. The pool of         need for stewardship of public resources
                                 housing funded would most likely contain a higher proportion      and need to make the most efficient
                                 of studios and one-bedroom units. The pool of units (except       investments possible to get the most
                                 for PSH units with rent subsidy) funded will have higher rents,   from the limited amount of credits
                                 because they can support more debt and therefore need             available. This tiebreaker has been
                                 fewer tax credits.                                                lowered on the list but is still an
                                                                                                   important consideration.




                                                                                                                                     50|Page
                                               2025 Oregon QAP

Traci     HDC NW   9% Request    Knowing what information will be required for the 9%              The information required for the 9%
Manning            Form          Request as soon as possible will provide more equitable           Request Form will include information
                                 ability for all organizations to make the best application        related to the relevant criteria depending
                                 possible. Shorter time frames for pulling together information    on project type. Six weeks will be allowed
                                 tend to advantage larger, more resourced organizations.           for the application and the intention is to
                                                                                                   have a simple enough application that
                                                                                                   this is not challenging for anyone that has
                                                                                                   a project ready to move forward.



Traci     HDC NW   9% Criteria   Can you confirm how the requirement to close in 12 months         The 12 month requirement for 9% LIHTC
Manning                          relates to the 9% Request Form? Does the 12 month clock to        projects will begin after the project
                                 start ticking after 1) 9% Request Form 2) Impact Assessment       receives HSC approval to move forward
                                 3) HSC approval? Can you confirm that those items occur in        into Financial Eligibility. Projects applying
                                 that order                                                        for 9% LIHTC will be expected to be far
                                                                                                   enough along to provide Impact
                                                                                                   Assessment responses in a timely
                                                                                                   manner, however.



Traci     HDC NW   9%            The incentive to increase debt per unit also produces lower       OHCS has a mandate to fund as many
Manning            Tiebreakers   expenses per unit (so that there is more revenue available to     units as possible with our available
                                 pay the mortgage), which means the project is less resilient to   resources and trusts that the
                                 increases in operating costs and more likely to require           development community in Oregon will
                                 intervention for long term preservation.                          continue working with us to make
                                                                                                   projects more resilient to shifts in the
                                                                                                   market.




                                                                                                                                    51 |
                                                  2025 Oregon QAP

Traci     HDC NW   Developer Fee   Prior versions of the QAP included a table of maximum               OHCS is not updating its developer fees
Manning                            developer fee for various project and funding types. By             for LIHTC. They will be in an updated
                                   leaving it out and defaulting to the General Policy and             table in the GPGM with the gap only
                                   Guideline Manual, the effect is to cut maximum     fees for tax     developer fees and will be unchanged
                                   credit projects by 2%. Developer fee not only acknowledges          from the prior QAP table.
                                   the resources required to develop a project but also the risk,
                                   which is greater in a tax credit project with its myriad of
                                   regulations, costs and guarantees. During the sudden and
                                   sharp increase in labor, interest rates, supplies and other
                                   costs during the pandemic, relying on developer fee as a
                                   source of funding was the only thing that got many projects
                                   to completion. Revenues are down and expenses are way up
                                   for existing affordable housing portfolios. Many nonprofit
                                   owners have used hundreds of thousands of dollars to over
                                   $1 million from their project and organizational reserves to
                                   keep the doors open and are not getting paid for the resident
                                   services they are providing. Most would not have had those
                                   reserves available if it weren’t for past developer fee
                                   earnings.
Traci     HDC NW   9%              Universal Design. We are very supportive of advancing               Based on similar feedback, OHCS is
Manning            Tiebreakers-    accessibility and Universal Design. However, without a              replacing "Universal Design" with
                   Universal       current definition of Universal Design, the first tiebreaker is     "Enhanced Accessibility." OHCS has also
                   Design          difficult to evaluate. It is possible that there will be more       included specific requirements to meet
                                   projects that meet one of the three criteria included than          this standard.
                                   there are resources available, as Universal Design is
                                   potentially accessible for all projects. Depending on how
                                   intense the criteria are for Universal Design, it could become
                                   a threshold criteria or a new b or c. The lack of a definition of
                                   Universal Design is a large challenge for Sponsors going into
                                   this first funding round. eration will have the following less
                                   desirable consequences.
Traci     HDC NW   9% Criteria     We have seen in some places a proposal for a $3 million limit       Yes, there will be a $3 million limit on gap
Manning                            on OHCS subsidy when combined with 9% tax credits. This is a        subsidy for 9% LIHTC deals. This limit will
                                   critical limitation in determining project feasibility. Many        be in the updated ORCA manual.
                                   projects are spending time and resources currently
                                   determining feasibility. Is this limit being proposed?”




                                                                                                                                       52   |
                                                   2025 Oregon QAP

Traci      HDC NW   Technical       You've probably caught it already. One of the criteria, and the       These criteria are also applicable to
Manning                             tricky bit is, | think it's 1 of the Federal criteria that you ask    acquisition/rehab projects. This is a
(Public                             about is historic. If the thing | can't remember what it is, but if   required selection criteria by Code.
Hearing)                            it's historic, then you get some points for it, and | think that's
                                    a Federal thing. But the header for that section is for new
                                    construction projects. So the historic and new construction,
                                    don't work well together.




Traci      HDC NW   Definitions     For clarity and predictability, we recommend aligning                 OHCS will ensure the definition used for
Manning                             definitions about what constitutes a “material change”,               material change in the ORCA is used
                                    “substantial change” and “project changes” and what actions           across the board.
                                    OHCS may take as a result “re-evaluation” “reconsideration”.
                                    In addition, we recommend     creating objective standards (10%
                                    change in total project cost) that will not overburden the
                                    sponsor or OHCS with reporting or evaluating, such as would
                                    be created by requiring an action and evaluation of every
                                    change in project cost or every design element.

Traci      HDC NW   Equity Pay in   | do want to second Stefs comment about the pay-in fee                Thank you for your feedback, OHCS will
Manning             Schedule        schedule. | think that there are so many nuances to                   remove this from the QAP.
(Public                             negotiating a tax credit price. It could depend on where the
Hearing)                            tax credit investors are at in their calendar in their tax year
                                    and it just feels like a level of detail that we wouldn't really
                                    want in the QAP. | think if it's something that OHCS wants to
                                    engage more with, maybe there's better ways to do that. But
                                    | think it could backfire have some unintended consequences.




                                                                                                                                          53 |
                                                         2025 Oregon QAP

Michael Fu   Home      Conduit Bond       High bond issuance costs means more complex LIHTC deal             Our proposal follows all IRS limits, and
(forwarded   Forward   Charges            executions. There are Treasury Regulations that apply to our       has been vetted and approved by our
to the QAP                                LIHTC projects, in particular, the Program Investment Rule         financial advisors.   The proposed charges
email)                                    that states if bond issuance costs are too high (higher than       are under what the agency is legally
                                          0.125% on an annual basis) then the Bond holder and the            allowed to charge in terms of “full
                                          LIHTC investor can’t be the same entity. This presents a big       spread” from what the IRS allows under
                                          issue for developers because lenders and investors often only      current tax law. For certain structures like
                                          will participate in your deal if they can be the LIHTC investor    short-term draws, related parties and re-
                                          and the bond holder (construction lender).    We’ve had to go      issuances, we will work with our advisors
                                          down more complex deal structures (cash collateralized             (bond counsel, financial advisors, our
                                          bonds, Baldwin) or multiple construction lenders (PCC              internal debt management team) to get
                                          Killingsworth) to get partners. This just adds cost and            as close to the present value of this
                                          complexity to our deals, further diminishing the units we can      charge as possible, which might require
                                          build.                                                             different calculations. We understand
                                                                                                             that there can be efficiency when the
                                                                                                             bond holder and LIHTC investor are the
                                                                                                             same entity, and will continue to allow
                                                                                                             related parties.
Jonathan     Home      Expiring           Pg 16, line 32, Further definition is needed here. “Expiring       Given that the cost to preserve all
Trutt        Forward   projects at risk   projects” should include any OHCS-funded property,                 expiring properties is likely to far outstrip
                       of conversion      regardless of the ownership status, within 10 years of the         available resources, we are focusing on
                       to market-rate     expiration of its affordable housing covenants. “Regardless of     projects whose conversion to market
                                          ownership status” is important because a project acquired by       could have the greatest negative impact
                                          a nonprofit or housing authority from a profit-motivated           to tenants. We fully realize that
                                          owner should not lose its “expiring use” status simply             nonprofits and PHAs sometimes do
                                          because of the involvement of a mission-based organization.        dispose of assets they can no longer
                                          Similarly, because of the operating pressures experienced by       effectively manage; some of this need we
                                          all affordable owners, OHCS should not assume that                 address in other preservation categories.
                                          affordable housing properties owned by nonprofits nearing          We also see those owners as far less likely
                                          the end of their affordability term are any less at risk of        for-profit owners to allow projects to
                                          market conversion than those owned by profit-motivated             convert to market rate. Restricted rents
                                          owned owners. “Risk of conversion to market-rate” should           relative to market is something we are
                                          account for the reality of local market conditions. There could    looking closely at, and we are adjusting
                                          be properties where market conversion would make no                the final tiebreakers to partially account
                                          difference in the rents charged. The fact of an expiring           for that.
                                          affordability covenant should not, in and of itself, be a reason
                                          to offer a preserving entity 9% LIHTCs set aside via the QAP.



                                                                                                                                              54   |
                                                   2025 Oregon QAP

Jonathan   Home      Conduit Bond   Pg 7, Line 10, The size of OHCS bond issuance fees already       Thank you for your feedback. The
Trutt      Forward   Charges        create financing challenges and unnecessary complication         proposed recurring charge is a 0.25%
                                    due to Program Investment Rules. The department’s proposal       annual charge on the outstanding (or
                                    to further increase bond fees reinforces these challenges and    drawn) balance of the total bond, that
                                    directs funding away from unit production. Additionally, the     continues yearly until the bond is fully
                                    proposed on-going compliance charge appears to bea               paid off. The charge is assessed on
                                    substantial increase from current amounts. If true, this will    whatever is outstanding, so this includes
                                    only further increase annual operating costs and, in turn,       short-term if it is outstanding during the
                                    increase demand for gap funding resources such as LIFT.          yearly calculation. As of June 2024, costs
                                                                                                     associated with conduit bond issuance
                                                                                                     are now allowed to generate eligible basis
                                                                                                     for the computation of Low-Income
                                                                                                     Housing Tax Credits (LIHTC). This ruling
                                                                                                     should help offset some of the increase in
                                                                                                     issuance charges that sponsors may face
                                                                                                     in LIHTC deals because of these proposed
                                                                                                     changes.
Jonathan   Home      Waitlist       Pg 14, Line 23, This policy appears in the 9% section, but is    OHCS agrees and has updated the
Trutt      Forward                  not clearly limited to 9% LIHTC requests. This prohibition       language here and modified the process
                                    would create an impossible situation for many tax credit         to clarify the intent. Projects may remain
                                    projects—whether 4% or 9%-- which often need gap funding         on a reserve list for 9% LIHTC that will be
                                    sources such as LIFT or GHAP or PSH in addition to their tax     picked from if more credits become
                                    credits. contradicts the ORCA’s stated goal of “match[ing]       available. This list does not count against
                                    projects with the appropriate funding sources” (ORCA             project limit, but if the same project
                                    Manual, p. 4) and its recommendation that “that applicants       receives an LOI for a different resource it
                                    apply with a willingness to be flexible and accept a different   will be removed from the 9% LIHTC
                                    resource than originally requested and/or a combination of       reserves.
                                    OHCS resources, as this flexibility may allow for an expedited
                                    funding process.” (ORCA Manual, p.13) This limitation should
                                    therefore be eliminated from the QAP.




                                                                                                                                     55 |
                                                      2025 Oregon QAP

Michael Fu   Home      Conduit Bond   Higher bond fees directly lower the amount of housing we        Thank you for your feedback. As of June
(forwarded   Forward   Charges        can build by directing funds away from construction.            2024, costs associated with conduit bond
to the QAP                                                                                            issuance are now allowed to generate
email)                                                                                                eligible basis for the computation of Low-
                                                                                                      Income Housing Tax Credits (LIHTC). This
                                                                                                      ruling should help offset some of the
                                                                                                      increase in issuance charges that
                                                                                                      sponsors may face in LIHTC deals because
                                                                                                      of these proposed changes.

Jonathan     Home      Closing        Pg 8, Lines 30-31, This should be revised to 60 days. Thirty    Thank you for your feedback. OHCS will
Trutt        Forward   Extension      days can prove insufficient to handle a last-minute challenge   consider for the next QAP update when
                       Request        that arises just before closing.                                we have been able to evaluate more
                                                                                                      project's experience going through this
                                                                                                      process, but hope the incentive here is to
                                                                                                      not need an extension because the
                                                                                                      project is truly ready to proceed in
                                                                                                      advance of getting to this point.


Michael Fu   Home      Conduit Bond   Can you clarify how the recurring annual charges will be        The proposed recurring charge is a 0.25%
(forwarded   Forward   Charges        calculated under the new PAB bond issuance rules?               annual charge on the outstanding (or
to the QAP                                                                                            drawn) balance of the total bond, that
email)                                                                                                continues yearly until the bond is fully
                                                                                                      paid off. The charge is assessed on
                                                                                                      whatever is outstanding, so this includes
                                                                                                      short-term if it is outstanding during the
                                                                                                      yearly calculation.




                                                                                                                                      56|Page
                                                   2025 Oregon QAP

Jonathan   Home      Waitlist       The waitlist process for 4% LIHTC projects is contrary to the      Thank you for your feedback. OHCS will
Trutt      Forward   Process        overall goal of a managed queue of 4% LIHTC projects. A PAB        be adding additional information to the
                                    allocation process that utilizes an improved scheduling tool       ORCA Impact Assessment step to assess
                                    (as recommended above) at the completion of the ORCA’s             viability of 4% projects with PAB to close
                                    Financial Eligibility Stage—i.e. after projects have already       in this calendar year, including 50% and
                                    successfully completed many scheduling milestones—would            95% designs and final permit approval
                                    best facilitate a managed queue. On the other hand, the            anticipated dates.
                                    application of a “first completed, first reviewed / waitlisted”
                                    model at Impact Assessment introduces scheduling
                                    arbitrariness into the process. Completing Impact Assessment
                                    depends on how (a) how quickly sponsors fill out forms and
                                    do minimal design work and (b) how quickly the Applications
                                    Team   processes sponsor-information provided. This could
                                    lead to unwanted results: i.e. a project that has building
                                    permits and could close within a year is waitlisted behind a
                                    project that is first beginning design and is at least two years
                                    from closing.
Jonathan   Home      Ability to     Pg 6, Line 11, Operating costs have increased dramatically in      Thank you for your feedback, OHCS
Trutt      Forward   Service Debt   the past three years. All discussions of right-sizing debt must    agrees and this is the reason that we have
                                    account for post-COVID operation cost realities.                   increased gap subsidy limits as well as
                                                                                                       updated our proforma to include an
                                                                                                       overall escalation of construction costs.




                                                                                                                                       57|Page
                                                    2025 Oregon QAP

Jonathan   Home      4% & 9%         Pg 37, Both the QAP and ORCA have bright-line tests as             We appreciate this feedback. Projects can
Trutt      Forward   LIHTCs          projects advance towards financial close that do not reflect       make non-material changes without
                                     realistic development timelines and processes. Specifically: A     sending projects to the beginning of
                                     requirement that any project lock in its budget six months         ORCA; this includes up to 10% of OHCS
                                     before its closing is untenable. This is especially true for tax   investment amount.
                                     credit projects, which often have to revise budgets based on
                                     information that materializes during the private sector
                                     underwriting and credit approval process. Additionally,
                                     sponsors commonly have to value engineer their design
                                     based on general contractor bids received shortly before
                                     closing. Sending projects to the beginning of ORCA for
                                     adjusting the budget and/or design during the last six months
                                     before closing assumes that sponsors can exercise a level of
                                     control that they simply do not have.
Jonathan   Home      Universal       Pg 16, Line 23 & Pg 9, Line 23, Universal Design is an             Based on similar feedback, OHCS is
Trutt      Forward   Design          amorphous concept. It does not have single, clear definition.      replacing "Universal Design" with
                                     Thus, it is inappropriate to use as a tiebreaker or reason for a   "Enhanced Accessibility." OHCS has also
                                     basis boost.                                                       included specific requirements to meet
                                                                                                        this standard.


Jonathan   Home      Waitlist        OHCS should eliminate the “first completed, first reviewed”        Projects that are able to close in calendar
Trutt      Forward   Process         element of PAB allocation determinations. It should rely           year 2025 will be prioritized for review, as
                                     solely instead on the improved project scheduling                  projects that cannot close in 2025 are not
                                     information described above when making PAB allocations.           eligible for that resource.
                                     These allocations should be tracked publicly on the ORCA
                                     dashboard in conjunction with projects’ progress towards
                                     scheduling milestones.




Jonathan   Home      Affordability   If certain OHCS gap resources (e.g. 11Q Bonds) cannot require      The affordability section of the LIFT
Trutt      Forward   Period          60-year affordability, OHCS should clarify which resources         manual has been updated to allow for
                                     face this restriction and the reasons why (e.g. constitutional     pairing LIFT with other OHCS resources
                                     restrictions, statutory language, etc.)                            that have a 60-year affordability period.




                                                                                                                                        58 |
                                                       2025 Oregon QAP

Michael Fu   Home      Conduit Bond    Housing Authorities can issue our own bonds if we can get an         Thank you for your feedback. While we
(forwarded   Forward   Charges         allocation of PABs. OHCS’s rules that if we get gap funding          are not contemplating policy change at
to the QAP                             from OHCS we cannot be the bond issuer means we cannot               this time, OHCS has set-aside $100M in
email)                                 avoid the issue described in (2). Allowing Housing Authorities       PABs for Housing Authorities for 2026.
                                       to use our bonding capacity when being supported by OHCS
                                       with gap funds could also help solve the issue.


Jonathan     Home      Affordability   Sixty-year affordability should be a baseline requirement for        OHCS has been working towards this over
Trutt        Forward   Period          all 4% LIHTC projects. The QAP language on affordability             the past several years and will continue to
                                       terms for 4% LIHTC projects paired with other resources is           push on it. Most OHCS programs now are
                                       unclear. (p. 19.) It appears to leave the door open to               at this 60-year minimum.
                                       affordability periods of less than 60 years. If so, it will hasten
                                       the expiring restriction challenges that the PUSH program
                                       seeks to address.




Jonathan     Home      Affordability   Regardless of affordability term restrictions imposed by other       OHCS has been working towards this over
Trutt        Forward   Period          state resources paired with 4% LIHTCs, OHCS should require           the past several years and will continue to
                                       60-year affordability for all 4% projects as a matter of policy.     push on it. Most OHCS programs now are
                                       This would not present underwriting challenges even if other         at this 60 year minimum.
                                       state resources cannot require 60-year affordability periods.
                                       Lenders and investors are accustomed to underwriting
                                       projects where different funding sources bring different
                                       affordability periods.




                                                                                                                                           59|Page
                                                       2025 Oregon QAP

Jonathan   Home      4% & 9%           The QAP and ORCA’s six-month closing timeline for 4% LIHTCs         We appreciate this feedback. The goal is
Trutt      Forward   LIHTCs            is too ambitious and has a Catch-22 as its core. If strictly        that 4% projects close in calendar year
                                       enforced, it will lead to the misallocation of sponsor and          2025 and the state maximizes use of all
                                       OHCS staff time. The ORCA and QAP state that a 4% LIHTC             PAB allocation.
                                       project in the Commitment Step will return to Impact
                                       Assessment if it fails to close withing six months of funding
                                       award. (ORCA Manual, p. 35; QAP p. 13, lines 27-29). Meeting
                                       this timeline will require sponsors to lock in debt and equity
                                       terms prior to knowing a project’s OHCS-assigned closing
                                       date. However, lenders and investors cannot provide debt
                                       and equity pricing until they know the closing date.
                                       Competitive selection of lenders / investors is usually an eight
                                       to twelve-week effort, which will effectively burn through
                                       two to three months of the QAP/ORCA’s six-month closing
                                       timeline. Reaching closing within three or four months of
                                       lender/ investor selection is technically possible, but
                                       extremely ambitious. The three to four months prior to a
                                       closing is exactly when a project’s inevitable complexities
                                       come into sharpest focus and get the greatest scrutiny from
                                       lenders and investors. Responding to their questions is a
                                       time-intensive process that may require delaying closing a
                                       few weeks. A pass/fail test exactly six months after funding
                                       award would therefore regularly cause projects to start, stop
                                       and re-start. This process will burden sponsors’ and OHCS
                                       staff because pausing and restarting projects is always more
                                       work than simply seeing them through from start to finish.
Jonathan   Home      Risk of Loss of   Pg 16, lines 37-38, The definition of “Risk of Loss” should         A project pursuing RAD could qualify for
Trutt      Forward   Federal           include all public housing properties undertaking a                 preservation funds under the Risk of Loss:
                     Project Based     preservation effort via HUD’s Rental Assistance                     Physical or Financial Challenges category.
                     Subsidy           Demonstration   (RAD) or Section 18 programs. Given
                                       Congress’ decades of disinvestment in public housing, this
                                       entire portfolio of deeply affordable housing stock is at risk of
                                       loss.




                                                                                                                                          60| Page
                                                       2025 Oregon QAP

Jonathan   Home      4% & 9%            Changes to a project’s design and/or budget during this            The ORCA process supports this by
Trutt      Forward   LIHTCs             period should be expected as a standard part of the closing        accommodating project changes up until
                                        process.                                                           final resource commitment in the
                                                                                                           Commitment step.


Jonathan   Home      Tenant             Pg 18, lines 13-14, The 2023 Preservation Framework does           There is a definition in the Preservation
Trutt      Forward   vulnerability in   not define tenant vulnerability. Households in projects at risk    Funding Framework; this definition
                     Preservation       of loss due to physical or financial conditions could meet any     should be included in the QAP for clarity.
                     projects           number of potential definitions of this term. Adding this
                                        criterion will impose arbitrary distinctions and will not
                                        effectively distinguish between projects seeking limited
                                        resources. It should be eliminated.




Jonathan   Home      Project            Pg 24, Line 18, Project Changes should include material            Thank you for your feedback, this section
Trutt      Forward   Changes            deviations from the revised project schedule described above       has been edited to include what
                                        under Theme #2.                                                    constitutes a material change.



Jonathan   Home      4% & 9%            Projects should not rick losing their place in the closing queue   Thank you for your feedback, we
Trutt      Forward   LIHTCs             unless they present a request for OHCS resources (other than       endeavor to make documents as
                                        4% LIHTCs) that exceeds 10% of the amount approved by              consistent with each other as possible.
                                        Housing Stability Council in conjunction with the ORCA’s
                                        Commitment Step. The QAP appears to adopt this
                                        recommendation.    (p. 9, lines 11 — 12.) The ORCA should be
                                        updated to match this language from the QAP.

Jonathan   Home      Leveraging         Pg 17, Line 24, The Revised 2022 QAP allowed for priority          Thank you for your feedback. 4% LIHTC
Trutt      Forward   Local Funds        allocation of PABs / 4% LIHTCs for projects with “significant      projects are noncompetitive, and will
                                        local funds” —i.e. “a project that has the lesser of 10% of its    follow the ORCA process.
                                        total project resources or $5 million dollars from a local
                                        jurisdictional gap subsidy source.” This prioritization has been
                                        eliminated from the current draft QAP. It should be reinstated
                                        as a prioritization factor within the managed queue system
                                        for 4% LIHTCs. Similarly, it should be included within the
                                        second tiebreaker for 9% LIHTCs, which currently only
                                        considers leverage of federal HOME funding.


                                                                                                                                           61 |
                                                    2025 Oregon QAP

Jonathan   Home      Flawed Project   The Project Schedule utilized by OHCS has been largely           Thank you for your feedback, we will
Trutt      Forward   Scheduling       unchanged for twenty years. It does not track the interlinked, | consider this as part of the next round of
                     Tool             critical milestones that sponsors use to build a project’s       ORCA updates.
                                      development and closing schedule. It should be overhauled
                                      by a team of external experts to properly track these
                                      milestones and establish accountability for meeting them.
                                      Examples of some critical milestones not currently included in
                                      the Project Schedule include (but are not limited to): Land use
                                      approval(s) submission and approval, Design review
                                      submission and approval, Design milestones such as
                                      schematic design, design development, construction
                                      drawings. HUD Environmental    Review submission and
                                      approval. Lender & LIHTC selection. OHCS should require
                                      project schedules at ORCA Intake and use them as an initial
                                      screening tool to determine which efforts can advance to the
                                      Impact Assessment stage. Sponsors should be allowed
                                      reasonable grace periods for missing the various milestones.
                                      Each project’s schedule should be published on a publicly
                                      available dashboard to ensure transparency and
                                      accountability.
Jonathan   Home      Waitlist         Waitlisted projects should not count towards the two projects | Thank you for your feedback, we will
Trutt      Forward   Process          per sponsor per Impact Assessment phase. The reason is that — consider this as part of the next round of
                                      this limitation can keep viable projects building momentum      ORCA updates.
                                      towards closing stuck in Intake. OHCS will therefore lack a
                                      clear understanding of what is in the pipeline and how fast it
                                      can move.




                                                                                                                                      62|
                                                  2025 Oregon QAP

Jonathan   Home      Geographic    OHCS needs to clarify (1) whether LIHTC resources do or do      LIHTC resources do not count toward the
Trutt      Forward   Set Asides    not count towards the three geographic set-asides and (2) the   three geographic set asides in the ORCA.
                     related to    relationship between   Impact Assessment completion, project
                     ORCA          waitlisting and geographic set-asides. Regarding #1, sponsors
                                   waitlisted in the Western and Metro regions are curious
                                   whether the coming availability of LIHTCs will enable their
                                   projects to proceed to Financial Eligibility. Regarding #2,
                                   sponsors in the Metro region need clarification why projects
                                   that have completed Impact Assessment are being waitlisted
                                   when, according to ORCA pipeline information as of
                                   12/27/24, there is a $104 million difference between the
                                   Metro Geographic Set-Aside and the ORCA conditional
                                   funding commitments approved by Housing Stability Council.
Jonathan   Home      9% LIHTC      All the limitations from previous QAPs on the amount of 9%s     9% LIHTC set asides and project limits will
Trutt      Forward   Maximums      are not in the current draft. OHCS should continue to           be included in the ORCA manual.
                                   implement 9% LIHTCs limitations to ensure that no one
                                   project or sponsor is able to receive a disproportionate
                                   amount of 9% tax credits.

Jonathan   Home      HOA Project   Pg 12, line 15, Timing needs clarification: Do the years run    4% tax credits and PABs follow the
Trutt      Forward   List          January through December or July through June?                  calendar year.




                                                                                                                                  63 |
                                                2025 Oregon QAP

Jonathan   Home      4% LIHTCs   Regarding 4% LIHTCs, the ORCA and QAP are too permissive          Thank you for your feedback.
Trutt      Forward               on the front end (ORCA Impact Assessment and Financial
                                 Eligibility) and too prescriptive as projects approach closing
                                 (ORCA Commitment). ORCA processes will govern 4% LIHTC
                                 applications. (QAP, page 5, lines 8-9.) However, the ORCA
                                 Impact Assessment step over-relies on sponsor
                                 representations and does not effectively distinguish viable
                                 projects from infeasible ones. Sponsors willing to agree to
                                 OHCS policy goals and do minimal design work can move any
                                 two projects from Intake into the Impact Assessment queue.
                                 At that point, they have a year to complete Impact
                                 Assessment (ORCA Manual, p. 14). Once projects clear Impact
                                 Assessment, OHCS first begins to take a more in-depth look at
                                 project viability during Financial Eligibility. Failure to make
                                 progress on Financial Eligibility evaluation standards for six
                                 months (nine months for Rural Development projects) will
                                 send a project back to Intake. (ORCA Manual, p. 28.) This
                                 approach   has two drawbacks. First, it will compel OHCS to
                                 devote significant staff time during Impact Assessment and
                                 Financial Eligibility to projects that ultimately prove
                                 infeasible. Having successfully steered two projects through
                                 Impact Assessment,   Home   Forward can attest to the amount
                                 of iterative work required, even though Impact Assessment’s
                                 primary goal is a review of alignment with OHCS policy
                                 objectives. (ORCA Manual, p. 13.) Second, it gives sponsors
                                 far too long—up to 18 months—to demonstrate that a
                                 project is realistic and truly moving forward. This extended
                                 timeframe will hinder OHCS’ efforts to spur affordable
                                 housing supply via 4% LIHTCs as quickly as possible. It will
                                 complicate the difficult task of allocating over-subscribed
                                 Private Activity Bond and gap resources via a transparent and
                                 predictable managed queue. A few years into the ORCA
                                 process, we will have data on which potential 4% LIHTC
                                 projects cleared Impact Assessment and then failed to
                                 complete Financial Eligibility. Home Forward believes that this
                                 data will demonstrate a pattern: overly optimistic
                                 assumptions regarding construction cost and/or scheduling.
                                 Both of these key predictors of a project’s success or failure


                                                                                                                                  64|Page
              2025 Oregon QAP

are detectable at the moment it makes the early jump from
Intake to Impact Assessment.




                                                            65|Page
                                                     2025 Oregon QAP

Jonathan   Home      4% LIHTCs        OHCS should be more discriminating in determining which 4%        Thank you for your feedback.
Trutt      Forward                    LIHTCs projects move from Intake to Impact—both in terms
                                      of financial feasibility and project schedule. Building an
                                      effectively managed 4% LIHTC queue will require Impact
                                      Assessment work that goes beyond demonstrating policy
                                      alignment. It will require initial due diligence on projected
                                      construction costs (by utilizing cost data OHCS currently
                                      collects) and scheduling milestones



Jonathan   Home      4% & 9%          Both the ORCA and QAP should be revised to give sponsors a        Thank you for your feedback.
Trutt      Forward   LIHTCs           year, and one 60-day grace period, to close after assignment
                                      of a closing date by OHCS.




Jonathan   Home      Flawed Project   OHCS relies on a flawed project scheduling tool. This reliance    Thank you for your feedback.
Trutt      Forward   Scheduling       undermines the goal of a managed queue of LIHTC and other
                     Tool             resources. The QAP says that “Through the ORCA, PAB will be
                                      tracked and allocated based upon a first complete, first
                                      reviewed process and in alignment with the estimated closing
                                      date of the project as provided by the applicant.” (p.11, lines
                                      28 - 30). The assumption underlying this statement is that
                                      OHCS has information at its disposal to determine whether
                                      sponsors are progressing towards their closing date. This
                                      assumption   is inaccurate.




                                                                                                                                       66|Page
                                                               2025 Oregon QAP

Jonathan        Home           PHA Set Aside    Pg 7, Lines 26-28, Public Housing Authority projects using the   Thank you for your feedback.
Trutt           Forward                         set-aside should not count towards the ORCA maximums on
                                                the number of projects per sponsor per ORCA phase.
                                                Counting such projects towards these maximums would run
                                                contrary to the purpose of the set-aside.




Jonathan        Home           Excess Funds     Pg 23, Line 37, “Excess funds” should be defined. The            Thank you for your feedback.
Trutt           Forward                         definition should exclude a reallocation from deferred to
                                                current developer of up to 25% of the total developer fee.
                                                This ability to reallocate funding to defer less developer fee
                                                will enable project sponsors to better shoulder the
                                                development and operational risks that, increasingly, are
                                                draining their resources.




Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Inequities for   Move away from timestamp-based waitlists and implement a         OHCS has standards and requirements for
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Rural            managed   queue system where projects are matched with           project timelines for all projects applying
Brian Hoop      CDC,           Organizations    resources based on readiness and regional priorities.            for funding. ORCA allows project
                Housing        and Smaller                                                                       developments to move swiftly through
                Oregon         Developers                                                                        the funding process to receive final
                                                                                                                 funding commitment before financial
                                                                                                                 close, it also provides up to 6 months in
                                                                                                                 the financial review process for those
                                                                                                                 who need that time to complete needed
                                                                                                                 diligence. Where we are offering time-
                                                                                                                 sensitive resources such as the 4% LIHTC
                                                                                                                 PAB resources for 2025, we are including
                                                                                                                 narrower requirements for
                                                                                                                 documentation to support readiness to
                                                                                                                 construction closing this year. Given that
                                                                                                                 developers need resource certainty to
                                                                                                                 invest in readiness along with resource
                                                                                                                 over subscription, OHCS is relying on


                                                                                                                                                67| Page
                                                                2025 Oregon QAP

                                                                                                               holding ORCA process standards as an
                                                                                                               equitable form of providing resource
                                                                                                               access that prioritizes timely delivery of
                                                                                                               housing to community. Where regions
                                                                                                               collaborate with the development
                                                                                                               community to prioritize what projects
                                                                                                               seek ORCA resources, they would be able
                                                                                                               to do so.


Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Inequities for   Rural community-based organizations cannot often compete       OHCS has established a team of Technical
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Rural            effectively in a process that favors larger, well-resourced    Advisors that works statewide to support
Brian Hoop      CDC,           Organizations    organizations. Projects by long standing community based       rural nonprofits in navigating the ORCA
                Housing        and Smaller      organizations   in these areas are frequently delayed or       and QAP processes. The ORCA has a
                Oregon         Developers       overshadowed by projects with greater institutional backing,   funding set aside available to culturally
                                                as they are able to more quickly navigate the application      specific organizations and nonprofits
                                                process. This dynamic exacerbates inequities and leaves        developing in rural areas and has also
                                                critical rural housing needs unmet. Capacity Gaps: Smaller     dedicated capacity and predevelopment
                                                rural organizations often cannot meet the rigid deadlines or   funds that prioritized rural communities.
                                                navigate the extensive requirements of ORCA and QAP            Additionally, while ORCA allows project
                                                processes.                                                     developments to move swiftly through
                                                                                                               the funding process to receive final
                                                                                                               funding commitment before financial
                                                                                                               close, it also provides up to 6 months in
                                                                                                               the financial review process for those
                                                                                                               who need additional time to complete
                                                                                                               needed diligence.




                                                                                                                                               68 | Page
                                                              2025 Oregon QAP

Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Inequities for   Implement a milestone-based tracking system that evaluates     Projects that are years away from
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Rural            projects based on readiness and documented progress (e.g.,     groundbreaking are not eligible for
Brian Hoop      CDC,           Organizations    permitting and funding commitments). This would prioritize     funding. The reason OHCS has specific
                Housing        and Smaller      shovel-ready projects over those that are years away from      expectations around timelines is to
                Oregon         Developers       groundbreaking.                                                ensure that projects that are not ready to
                                                                                                               proceed are not awarded    resources in
                                                                                                               lieu of projects that are ready to move
                                                                                                               forward and can use the resources
                                                                                                               sooner. ORCA allows project
                                                                                                               developments to move swiftly through
                                                                                                               the funding process to receive final
                                                                                                               funding commitment before financial
                                                                                                               close, it also provides up to 6 months in
                                                                                                               the financial review process for those
                                                                                                               who need additional time to complete
                                                                                                               needed diligence.
Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Inequities for   Systemic Barriers: The existing intake and waitlist systems    OHCS has established a maximum of two
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Rural            disproportionately benefit organizations with more             projects per organization on the waitlist
Brian Hoop      CDC,           Organizations    resources, effectively sidelining smaller, community-focused   to keep larger developers from pushing
                Housing        and Smaller      entities.                                                      out those who may take longer to get
                Oregon         Developers                                                                      their application ready. Additionally,
                                                                                                               while ORCA allows project developments
                                                                                                               to move swiftly through the funding
                                                                                                               process to receive final funding
                                                                                                               commitment before financial close, it also
                                                                                                               provides up to 6 months in the financial
                                                                                                               review process for those who need
                                                                                                               additional time to complete needed
                                                                                                               diligence.




                                                                                                                                              69 | Page
                                                               2025 Oregon QAP

Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Improving         The absence of a standardized milestone tracking system          The ORCA process has milestones and
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Transparency      allows projects to hold spots in the queue without               because LIHTC resources will be part of
Brian Hoop      CDC,           and               demonstrating sufficient progress.                               the ORCA, LIHTC projects will be subject
                Housing        Accountability                                                                     to ORCA milestones. OHCS was told
                Oregon                                                                                            during initial engagement around the
                                                                                                                  ORCA that it was unreasonable to have
                                                                                                                  expectations of developers before
                                                                                                                  providing at least some soft commitment
                                                                                                                  of funding and thus have not done so for
                                                                                                                  projects in the waitlist that have not
                                                                                                                  received an LOI and resource reservation.
Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Inequities for    Shovel-Ready Delays: Rural projects that are shovel-ready are    OHCS has the same standards and
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Rural             often deprioritized in favor of less-prepared projects, due to   requirements for project timelines for all
Brian Hoop      CDC,           Organizations     ambiguous milestones.                                            projects applying for funding. ORCA
                Housing        and Smaller                                                                        allows project developments to move
                Oregon         Developers                                                                         swiftly through the funding process to
                                                                                                                  receive final funding commitment before
                                                                                                                  financial close, it also provides up to 6
                                                                                                                  months in the financial review process for
                                                                                                                  those who need additional time to
                                                                                                                  complete needed diligence.
Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Improving          Publish project schedules, including milestones and             OHCS is not holding projects on the
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Transparency       commitments, on a publicly accessible dashboard. This would     waitlist to timelines. OHCS was told
Brian Hoop      CDC,           and                increase transparency and accountability while enabling         during initial engagement around the
                Housing        Accountability   | sponsors to understand their position in the queue.             ORCA that it was unreasonable to have
                Oregon                                                                                            expectations of developers before
                                                                                                                  providing at least some soft commitment
                                                                                                                  of funding and thus have not done so for
                                                                                                                  projects in the waitlist that have not
                                                                                                                  received an LOI and resource reservation.




                                                                                                                                                70|Page
                                                               2025 Oregon QAP

Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Improving        Clearly define terms such as “universal design,” ensuring they      OHCS has pivoted to a focus on
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Transparency     are measurable and feasible across diverse project types. For       accessibility as a feature of universal
Brian Hoop      CDC,           and              example, universal design standards should be tailored to           design that has been identified as a
                Housing        Accountability   accommodate     both urban and rural realities.                     critical need in properties statewide. We
                Oregon                                                                                              will have more in depth engagement on
                                                                                                                    moving into more fully universal design
                                                                                                                    projects over the coming year and will be
                                                                                                                    including geographic considerations in
                                                                                                                    those conversations.

Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Inequities for   Establish rural-specific tiebreaker criteria that recognize         Thank you for your feedback; OHCS has
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Rural            unique challenges, such as limited access to wraparound             led deliberate PSH investments to
Brian Hoop      CDC,           Organizations    services or the infeasibility of co-located amenities in sparsely   support capacity building and training and
                Housing        and Smaller      populated areas.                                                    technical assistance to rural communities
                Oregon         Developers                                                                           and have invested in the CARE program
                                                                                                                    to foster support for project efforts to co-
                                                                                                                    locate supports for families within
                                                                                                                    affordable housing properties.




Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Bond Issuance    Removing caps on bond issuance fees creates uncertainty and         While we are removing caps on bond
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Fees and         could discourage development.                                       issuance fees, there will be a standard
Brian Hoop      CDC,           Developer                                                                            and predictable structure of 1.5% of the
                Housing        Compensation                                                                         full tax-exempt portion of the bond.
                Oregon                                                                                              Although OHCS' 4% LIHTC allocation is
                                                                                                                    three times oversubscribed, we
                                                                                                                    acknowledge that this change could
                                                                                                                    create uncertainty for sponsors.




                                                                                                                                                     71 |
                                                                2025 Oregon QAP

Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Improving        Introduce objective benchmarks for evaluating project               These are all standards within the ORCA.
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Transparency     progress, such as permitting, secured funding, and pre-             The ORCA is designed to set key
Brian Hoop      CDC,           and              construction readiness, to ensure that only viable projects         milestones for project approvals to
                Housing        Accountability   advance in the process.                                             ensure they are meeting standards. If
                Oregon                                                                                              they are not meeting standards ina
                                                                                                                    timely fashion as defined by the ORCA,
                                                                                                                    they will not advance in the process.




Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Improving        Terms like “universal design,” Do “substantial project change,’ i   OHCS will include more detailed
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Transparency     and “affordability requirements” lack precise definitions,          definitions for some of the terms in
Brian Hoop      CDC,           and              leading to inconsistent application.                                question. Based on similar feedback,
                Housing        Accountability                                                                       OHCS is replacing "Universal Design" with
                Oregon                                                                                              "Enhanced Accessibility." OHCS has also
                                                                                                                    included specific requirements to meet
                                                                                                                    this standard.




Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Long-Term        Allocate resources to support a mix of AMls, considering the        OHCS is not the developer. Developers
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Affordability    total subsidy per unit and long-term operational                    are the entities responsible for taking on
Brian Hoop      CDC,           and Financial    sustainability. This approach would avoid creating financially      the project risk and modeling in a way
                Housing        Sustainability   fragile projects.                                                   that ensures the ability to maximize
                Oregon                                                                                              subsidy OHCS can offer and achieve long
                                                                                                                    term sustainability.




                                                                                                                                                   72|Page
                                                               2025 Oregon QAP

Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Long-Term        Current policies allow for 30-year affordability in some cases,   OHCS has moved towards the 60-year
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Affordability    undermining the state’s commitment to long-term housing           affordability standard over the past
Brian Hoop      CDC,           and Financial    stability.                                                        several years on all programs and is
                Housing        Sustainability                                                                     committed to continuing to do so
                Oregon                                                                                            wherever possible.




Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Long-Term        Require all OHCS-funded    projects to meet a 60-year             OHCS has moved towards the 60-year
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Affordability    affordability standard, with nuanced approaches for mixed-        affordability standard over the past
Brian Hoop      CDC,           and Financial    finance projects to ensure feasibility.                           several years on all programs and is
                Housing        Sustainability                                                                     committed to continuing to do so
                Oregon                                                                                            wherever possible.




Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Bond Issuance    Maintain a cap on bond issuance fees, ensuring predictability     With our current $150k cap, a $10M deal
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Fees and         and fairness for developers regardless of bond size.              and a S50OM deal pay the same in bond
Brian Hoop      CDC,           Developer                                                                          issuance charges, which we do not see as
                Housing        Compensation                                                                       a reasonable comparison.
                Oregon




                                                                                                                                                73 |Page
                                                                2025 Oregon QAP

Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Inequities for    Introduce policies that incentivize partnerships between           OHCS has attempted to do this through
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Rural             larger developers and smaller or culturally specific               the creation of set asides and criteria that
Brian Hoop      CDC,           Organizations     organizations, without penalizing either party.                    support culturally specific organizations.
                Housing        and Smaller
                Oregon         Developers




Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Bond Issuance    | The exclusion of a developer fee schedule effectively reduces    The developer fee will be in the GPGM
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Fees and           compensation for developers, limiting their capacity to          and will not be changed from the
Brian Hoop      CDC,           Developer          manage project risks and reinvest in future projects.            previously used LIHTC developer fees.
                Housing        Compensation
                Oregon




Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Bond Issuance _ Establish a standardized developer fee schedule to recognize       | The developer fee will be in the GPGM
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Fees and        the resources and risks involved in affordable housing               and will not be changed from the
Brian Hoop      CDC,           Developer       development, particularly during periods of market volatility.       previously used LIHTC developer fees.
                Housing        Compensation
                Oregon




                                                                                                                                                    74|Page
                                                               2025 Oregon QAP

Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Inequities for   Develop technical assistance programs specifically tailored to     OHCS has established a team of Technical
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Rural            the needs of rural and smaller organizations, focusing on          Advisors to support rural nonprofits in
Brian Hoop      CDC,           Organizations    navigating funding processes, compliance, and project              navigating the process.
                Housing        and Smaller      management.
                Oregon         Developers




Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Long-Term        Emphasizing the lowest AMI units without adequate subsidies        OHCS has a sliding scale of subsidy limits
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Affordability    increases financial risks for developers and jeopardizes long-     that increases as AMI restrictions go
Brian Hoop      CDC,           and Financial    term project viability.                                            down.
                Housing        Sustainability
                Oregon




Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Non-Profit       Pg 5, Line 16, The State needs to prioritize the value of the      Thank you for your feedback.
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Prioritization   nonprofit sector’s commitment to produce housing that is
Brian Hoop      CDC,                            affordable to lower income people over the long-term, as
                Housing                         well as to stimulate investment in neighborhoods in need of
                Oregon                          revitalization. Nonprofit housing providers are credited for
                                                their connections to community and residents, their
                                                commitment to providing services for residents, and their
                                                potential for accessing affordable land and buildings. Set
                                                aside is too low. Specific to the 9% tax credits, the draft QAP
                                                has a set aside of 10% of the annual credit ceiling to Qualified
                                                Non-Profits.




                                                                                                                                                  75 |
                                                               2025 Oregon QAP

Kevin Cronin,   Housing        Non-Profit       Pg 5, Line 16, Increase set-aside for nonprofits: Change to         Thank you for your feedback.
Rita Grady,     Oregon, Polk   Prioritization   50% of the annual 9% tax credit ceiling must go to Qualified
Brian Hoop      CDC,                            Nonprofits and Community      Housing Development
                Housing                         Organizations (CHDO).
                Oregon




Manuela         IBHS           Criteria         We strongly encourage OHCS to require or incentivize                Thank you for your feedback. OHCS sees
Ekowo                                           through the scoring criteria a designation from IBHS’s Wildfire     the value in resilient construction
                                                Prepared program for all single-family home projects seeking        practices, and we thank you for bringing
                                                LIHTC funding in the state. Wildfire Prepared is a voluntary        this to our attention and we will consider
                                                designation program designed to reduce the risk of home             for the next QAP update.
                                                ignition. The program incorporates a set of critical mitigation
                                                actions that, when undertaken collectively, can meaningfully
                                                reduce the risk of a home igniting from embers, flames, and
                                                radiant heat. Mitigations include actions like installing a Class
                                                A fire rated roof; creating five feet of defensible space — the
                                                first five feet surrounding a home where combustible
                                                material is reduced; and installing ember resistant vents.
                                                Wildfire Prepared is currently available in Oregon




                                                                                                                                                   76|Page
                                               2025 Oregon QAP

Manuela   IBHS   Criteria       In addition, we encourage OHCS to require installation of a        Thank you for your feedback. OHCS sees
Ekowo                           sealed roof deck for all projects seeking LIHTC funding in         the value in resilient construction
                                Oregon—a protective measure that will protect buildings as         practices, and we thank you for bringing
                                their roof covers age. Based on decades of scientific research,    this to our attention and we will consider
                                a sealed roof deck can provide a secondary water barrier to        for the next QAP update.
                                the roof to help prevent water intrusion if the roof cover is
                                compromised during high-wind events. We have found that a
                                sealed roof deck can reduce water entry by as much as 95
                                percent and keep out nine bathtubs of water for every inch of
                                rain that falls on a 2,000 square foot damaged,    unsealed
                                asphalt roof. To require a sealed roof deck for all projects and
                                Wildfire Prepared for all single-family home projects, we
                                suggest the following edits be made to OHCS’s Draft 2024
                                QAP: Programmatic Requirements,      Minimum      Requirements
                                for LIHTC Projects, Resilient Construction, Commit to resilient
                                construction standards. All projects must install a sealed roof
                                deck. All single-family home projects must obtain from the
                                Insurance Institute for Business & Home, Safety a Wildfire
                                Prepared designation.
Manuela   IBHS   Supplemental   To incentivize resilient construction standards, we suggest the    Thank you for your feedback. OHCS sees
Ekowo            Criteria       following edits be made to OHCS’s Draft 2024 QAP:                  the value in resilient construction
                                Supplemental Criteria. Resilient Construction- Developments        practices, and we thank you for bringing
                                built with resilient construction standards will be awarded up     this to our attention and we will consider
                                to 3 points as described below. Resilient construction             for the next QAP update.
                                standards are optional. Sealed roof deck — 1 point, Single-
                                family home projects that obtain from the Insurance Institute
                                for Business & Home Safety a Wildfire Prepared designation
                                can earn up to two additional points. Wildfire Prepared Home
                                Base — 1 point & Wildfire Prepared Home Plus — 2 points.




                                                                                                                                  77|Page
                                               2025 Oregon QAP

Manuela   IBHS   Supplemental   As set forth below, a sealed roof deck and IBHS’s Wildfire        Thank you for your feedback. OHCS sees
Ekowo            Criteria       Prepared program provide science-based, field-proven tools        the value in resilient construction
                                for OHCS to incorporate resilience standards into the 2024        practices, and we thank you for bringing
                                QAP. Investment in resilience will create safer homes that can    this to our attention and we will consider
                                withstand the increasingly severe weather Oregon faces. In        for the next QAP update.
                                addition, it will make these properties lower risk (and
                                therefore more attractive risks) for property insurers. These
                                resilience tools are particularly important in Oregon which
                                experiences significant severe weather, particularly wildfires,
                                which poses risk to homes and communities: Oregon has a
                                variety of fuel types prone to fire across the state including
                                three primary fire behavior regions, characteristically wet
                                forests in coastal areas and on the northwest side of the
                                state, dry forests on the east side of the state and intermixed
                                forests in the inland southwest. Due to the impacts of fire
                                suppression and prevention driven by the 1935 USFS 10AM
                                Policy and Keep Oregon Green the natural fire frequencies of
                                these landscapes have been interrupted, and fuels have
                                accumulated. The changing climate in Oregon has also
                                increased drought conditions and increased the state’s fire
                                seasons resulting in an increase of severe fire in Oregon.
                                Oregon has seen an increase each decade from 1970 in the
                                number of wildfires larger than 5,000 acres, total acres
                                burned, and the mean size of wildfires despite a consistent
                                number of wildfires in the state, highlighting the increasing
                                severity and fire management challenges with wildland fires
                                in Oregon.




                                                                                                                                 78 | Page
                                             2025 Oregon QAP

Manuela   IBHS   Housing      Resilience is a Housing Issue- We encourage OHCS to treat          Thank you for your feedback. OHCS sees
Ekowo            Resilience   resilience as a housing issue. OHCS’s mission is to “provide       the value in resilient construction
                              stable and affordable housing and engage leaders to develop        practices, and we thank you for bringing
                              an integrated statewide policy that addresses poverty and          this to our attention and we will consider
                              provides opportunities for Oregonians.” We assert that this        for the next QAP update.
                              mission cannot be met without investments in resilient
                              construction. Investing in resilience for affordable housing
                              helps ensure that people are not only housed, but that they
                              remain housed following natural disasters. Quality housing
                              that withstands severe weather allows working families to
                              return home following natural disasters, which in turn
                              supports local economies and economic revitalization by
                              preventing businesses from closing from low demand        and
                              want of workers, protecting the local tax base. Low- and
                              moderate-income people and families need housing that is
                              affordable. And yet, housing is not, in fact, “affordable”
                              unless it provides savings to the resident not just on the day
                              of purchase (or lease signing), but on an ongoing basis as well.
                              Investments in resilience provide ongoing savings to
                              residents. Generally, risk reduction results in avoided
                              damages from severe weather and reduced insurance
                              premiums reflecting the reduction in risk. Further, given the
                              risks facing Oregon housing stemming from wildfires,
                              requiring or incentivizing resilient construction represents
                              good stewardship of public resources. In addition, sealed roof
                              decks can reduce the amplification of damage when roof
                              covers fail, and rain intrudes residences. Resilient
                              construction practices can help communities escape the
                              costly build-damage-rebuild cycle that can take place in areas
                              prone to severe weather.




                                                                                                                                79 |
                                               2025 Oregon QAP

Manuela   IBHS   Wildfire       Wildfire Prepared Reduces the Risk of Home Ignition IBHS’s         Thank you for your feedback. OHCS sees
Ekowo            Preparedness   Wildfire Prepared program brings together a systems-based          the value in resilient construction
                                approach of core mitigation actions that, when taken               practices, and we thank you for bringing
                                together, significantly reduce the risk of ignition when           this to our attention and we will consider
                                embers land on suburban properties and, should ignition            for the next QAP update.
                                occur, remove pathways leading flames to the home. The
                                program has two levels: Wildfire Prepared Home™ provides a
                                baseline level of risk reduction by protecting the home
                                against ignition from embers. It includes mitigation actions
                                focused on the roof, building features, and defensible space—
                                particularly, the removal of combustible material from the
                                five foot zone around the structure. Wildfire Prepared Home
                                Plus™ adds an additional set of mitigation actions, such as
                                noncombustible siding and dual paned, tempered glass
                                windows, and wildfire resistant decking material, that reduce
                                the risk of ignition from radiant heat.
Manuela   IBHS   Sealed Roof    Sealed Roof Decks are a Low-Cost, High-Impact Mitigation           Thank you for your feedback.
Ekowo            Decks          Action- Sealing roof decks is a cost-effective, highly effective
                                mitigation action that reduces loss from water damage if a
                                roof cover is compromised. Roof decks can be sealed in a
                                variety of ways: 1. Using tape and underlayment, which
                                requires a certain tape and underlayment material applied
                                directly to the roof deck. 2. Applying a full layer of self-
                                adhering membrane to the roof deck. 3. Installing two layers
                                of felt underlayment to the roof deck. 4. Applying spray foam
                                on the underside of the roof at every joint and seam. With a
                                variety of available methods and a strong ROI in averted
                                losses, sealing roof decks is an easy way to improve the
                                resilience of a building.




                                                                                                                                  80|Page
                                                             2025 Oregon QAP

Sarah       Innovative      Tiebreakers       Early childhood education centers and PSH are both more          There have a been a number of very
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                      difficult to achieve in rural settings.                          successful projects in rural Oregon to go
                                                                                                               through OHCS's PSH Institute and create
                                                                                                               successful projects that are currently
                                                                                                               housing chronically homeless individuals
                                                                                                               and families. OHCS has also recently
                                                                                                               conducted a study showing the urgent
                                                                                                               need for more childcare facilities in rural
                                                                                                               Oregon and there are examples of models
                                                                                                               that will work in those communities, as
                                                                                                               well as case studies, within that study
                                                                                                               that is also on our website.
Sarah       Innovative       PAB              Pg 12, Line 31, Clarify: “Changes in projects that incorporate   Yes, value engineering is a potential
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                      value engineering” is not unclear.   Is the intent that if a     strategy to help projects keep their
                                              project's resource needs exceed the 10% threshold but the        budgets within the required amount. This
                                              sponsor can bring them back within the 10% amount by VE          is for changes that do not impact the
                                              then it does not constitute a substantial change?                project significantly in relation to the
                                                                                                               material changes categories listed in the
                                                                                                               QAP. VE is expected primarily before
                                                                                                               construction starts and should not
                                                                                                               compromise safety, health, and livability
                                                                                                               of the residents. So, yes, as long as it is
                                                                                                               truly VE your comment is correct with
                                                                                                               regards to intent of that note.
Sarah       Innovative       Re-evaluation    “#2 the proposed Project will not have construction              OHCS reserves the right to re-evaluate a
Stevenson   Housing, Inc   | of Reservation   completion by the date mutually agreed upon.” Please clarify     reservation if projects are not meeting
                                              if OHCS will rescind reservation funding during construction —   standards laid out in the QAP at any point
                                              we strongly recommend this NOT be the case.                      in the development timeline. While it
                                                                                                               would be highly uncommon and a worst-
                                                                                                               case scenario for all parties, if the project
                                                                                                               is stalled to a degree that they cannot
                                                                                                               reconcile a completion date moving
                                                                                                               forward the state must have options at its
                                                                                                               disposal.




                                                                                                                                                 81|Page
                                                            2025 Oregon QAP

Sarah       Innovative      9% Application   Pg 28, Line 23, Development of projects during this period of     It is developers/sponsors responsibility to
Stevenson   Housing, Inc    Process          time carried extreme and unanticipated risks.     Yet the         navigate the risk associated with
                                             development of affordable housing during this time was            development of affordable housing, it is
                                             critical, providing affordable housing for people negatively      OHCS responsibility to effectively and
                                             impacted by the pandemic and post-pandemic times.           We    responsibly manage public funding for
                                             understand a need for developers to perform to expectations       affordable housing. There need to be
                                             but recommend adding mitigating language to this                  timing expectations for projects so that
                                             requirement so that sponsors who developed extremely              funded projects move forward to
                                             difficult projects in recent years can still have confidence in   construction as quickly as possible.
                                             submitting funding requests without risk of rejection.
Sarah       Innovative      Project          OHCS should improve its project schedule to better match          OHCS is not holding projects on the
Stevenson   Housing, Inc   | Schedule        development realities. QAP says that “Through the ORCA,           waitlist to timelines. OHCS was told
                                             PAB will be tracked and allocated based upon a first              during initial engagement around the
                                             complete, first reviewed process and in alignment with the        ORCA that it was unreasonable to have
                                             estimated closing date of the project as provided by the          expectations of developers before
                                             applicant.” When in the ORCA process is this happening? If a      providing at least some soft commitment
                                             managed queue is the goal, the appropriate time would be          of funding and thus have not done so for
                                             Impact Assessment in conjunction with a proper scheduling         projects in the waitlist that have not
                                             tool that (a) tracks the right benchmarks (not what’s in there    received an LOI and resource hold.
                                             now) (b) holds sponsors accountable with reasonable grace
                                             periods (i.e. isn’t all or nothing if you’re off by a week ona
                                             major milestone) (c) published each project’s schedule
                                             commitments on a dashboard to ensure accountability within
                                             the overall system.
Sarah       Innovative      Tiebreakers      We acknowledge that having some guardrails for cost per unit      OHCS understands the concerns around
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                     is important. However, using lowest tax credit allocation per     this criterion but also must balance the
                                             unit in addition to those limits has some undesirable             need for stewardship of public resources
                                             consequences, including: A preference for number of units         and need to make the most efficient
                                             produced over number of people housed. Smaller units are          investments possible to get the most
                                             less expensive to build and use less tax credits, but house       from the limited amount of credits
                                             fewer people. The pool of housing funded would most likely        available. This tiebreaker has been
                                             contain a higher proportion of studios and one-bedroom            lowered on the list but is still an
                                             units. The pool of units (except for PSH units with rent          important consideration.
                                             subsidy) funded will have higher rents, because they can
                                             support more debt and therefore need fewer tax credits. The
                                             incentive to increase debt per unit also produces lower
                                             expenses per unit (so that there is more revenue available to
                                             pay the mortgage), which means the project is less resilient to


                                                                                                                                                 82|
                                                          2025 Oregon QAP

                                           increases in operating costs and more likely to require
                                           intervention for long term preservation.

Sarah       Innovative     9% Request      Knowing what information will be required for the 9%              The information required for the 9%
Stevenson   Housing, Inc   Form            Request as soon as possible will provide more equitable           Request Form will include information
                                           ability for all organizations to make the best application        related to the relevant criteria depending
                                           possible. Shorter time frames for pulling together information    on project type. Six weeks will be allowed
                                           tend to advantage larger, more resourced organizations.           for the application and the intention is to
                                                                                                             have a simple enough application that
                                                                                                             this is not challenging for anyone that has
                                                                                                             a project ready to move forward.



Sarah       Innovative     Affordability   Pg 18, Line 18-23, Why are 4% projects paired with other          OHCS has been working towards this over
Stevenson   Housing, Inc   Period          OHCS resources granted a potentially shorter affordability        the past several years and will continue to
                                           period? We’d like to understand where this requirement lives      push on it. Most OHCS programs now are
                                           and who has authority to change it.                               at this 60 year minimum. The affordability
                                                                                                             section of the LIFT manual has been
                                                                                                             updated to allow for pairing LIFT with
                                                                                                             other OHCS resources that have a 60-year
                                                                                                             affordability period.


Sarah       Innovative     Waitlist        Only one waitlist project at a time is contrary to the point of   OHCS retains the ability to assign
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                   the ORCA. Page 4 of the ORCA says what we heard repeatedly        resources as they fit best. The waitlist is
                                           in the ORCA design process: “In the new ORCA, OHCS will           not resource specific, with the exception
                                           match projects with the appropriate resources.” The waitlist’s    of LIHTC which was not available when
                                           “pick a funding lane” requirement contradicts this approach.      the waitlist started. It is the intention in
                                           What if you happen to say PSH when you could get funded           the future to have PAB included with
                                           faster via GHAP or Housing Trust Fund, etc.? Do 4% LIHTCs         other resources here as well.
                                           count as a “resource” for the purpose of limiting waitlist
                                           eligible to one funding resource as a time? Or is “resource”
                                           defined as solely as state funds?




                                                                                                                                               83|Page
                                                         2025 Oregon QAP

Sarah       Innovative     PAB & 4%       Pg 11-12, Line 36-2, Question: what happens to the project(s)     Projects applying for PAB will be
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                  that lose(s) PAB?   Will it be provided PAB from the next         evaluated in the same way as other
                                          allocation?                                                       projects applying through the ORCA. If a
                                                                                                            project loses their PAB they would need
                                                                                                            to resubmit an application to update the
                                                                                                            project in a way that accounted for
                                                                                                            whatever the cause of that PAB loss was.




Sarah       Innovative     Waitlist       Waitlisting projects based on timestamps is crosswise with a      Projects that are years away from
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                  managed queue. For example, a project with building permits       groundbreaking are not eligible for
                                          that needs $10M     of gap funding and could close in 6 months    funding. That is why OHCS keeps more
                                          might get stuck behind a project asking for $50 million that,     rigid timelines, to keep these future
                                          by its own schedule, isn’t going to start construction for two    projects that are not ready to proceed
                                          years. That doesn’t make sense.                                   from holding resources that could be
                                                                                                            utilized sooner by more prepared
                                                                                                            projects.



Sarah       Innovative     Conduit Bond   Issuance Charge: Keep the cap, even if it is increased. The cap   Thank you for your feedback. With our
Stevenson   Housing, Inc   Charges        ensures predictability when laying multiple funding sources       current $150k cap, a $10M deal and a
                                          together to pay for all of the bond issuance fees. The issuance   S50M deal pay the same in bond issuance
                                          fee should not exceed $200,000 for all OHCS costs. These          charges, which we do not see as a
                                          costs are not in the control of the developer/sponsor             reasonable comparison. In our research,
                                          regardless of how big or small the bond issuance amount.          we did not see many examples of caps on
                                                                                                            issuance fees for state HFAs.




                                                                                                                                          84 |
                                                            2025 Oregon QAP

Sarah       Innovative      Developer Fee    During the sudden and sharp increase in labor, interest rates,   Thank you for your feedback. OHCS hopes
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                     supplies and other costs during the pandemic, relying on         the ORCA process will help alleviate some
                                             developer fee as a source of funding was the only thing that     of these issues by waiting until later in the
                                             got many projects to completion.                                 process for a full commitment of
                                                                                                              resources, but also reiterates the
                                                                                                              developer fee is not changing from the
                                                                                                              previous QAP.




Sarah       Innovative      Developer Fee    Revenues are down and expenses are up for existing               Thank you for your feedback. OHCS hopes
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                     affordable housing portfolios. Last fiscal year IHI spent over   the ORCA process will help alleviate some
                                             S1M of our organizational reserves to keep our properties        of these issues by waiting until later in the
                                             doors open; at the same time, because there is insufficient      process for a full commitment of
                                             cash flow we are also not being paid the resident services,      resources, but also reiterates the
                                             partnership management, or asset management fees on              developer fee is not changing from the
                                             which we rely to cover our staffing costs. We would not have     previous QAP.
                                             essential reserves to keep our company running or to
                                             subsidize our properties if it weren’t for past developer fee
                                             earnings.
Sarah       Innovative      9% Application   Pg 8, Line 14-15, Comment: The goal of a managed queue           The 9% LIHTC projects will have a
Stevenson   Housing, Inc   | Process         where the next project up is matched with the available and      different process for selection than
                                             appropriate sources is a good one. Having multiple waitlists     projects seeking other resources. We will
                                             and having to choose one feels contrary to meeting this goal.    rephrase from waitlist to better reflect
                                             If that isn’t feasible yet, please provide clear direction on    the intent here, which is ranking order for
                                             whether a sponsor can have multiple projects on a single         the current open 9% round.
                                             waitlist (such as the 9% or 4%), and whether they can
                                             maintain their spot on a waitlist while applying for an
                                             alternative funding source




                                                                                                                                              85|Page
                                                            2025 Oregon QAP

Sarah       Innovative     9% Application   Pg 26, Line 30, We recommend      increased flexibility and better   OHCS commits to working with partners
Stevenson   Housing, Inc   Process          understanding around recent development challenges so that           around their projects, while also
                                            new applications are not rejected if a former project was not        committing to fairness in the process to
                                            completed on schedule or within budget. Prior to the                 other projects that are more ready to
                                            pandemic, these criteria were predictable and regularly              proceed and can close in the agreed upon
                                            achievable. However, during the pandemic and post-                   window.
                                            pandemic periods, the marketplace was highly unpredictable,
                                            resulting in many impacts: instability in cost escalation of
                                            products during construction, labor shortages impacting the
                                            timely completion of tasks, less experienced labor impacting
                                            timely completion and exposure to extra costs, illness
                                            impacting the timely completion of tasks, material and
                                            product shortages, and long delays in delivery, impacting time
                                            and cost, significant interest rate changes during construction
Sarah       Innovative     Project          Pg 8, Line 30-31, Which financial close date does the 30-Day         This is not for one of the ORCA steps,
Stevenson   Housing, Inc   Performance      extension apply to for the “30-day extension to the financial        rather it is for the financial closing date
                           Guidelines       close date per project”? From which phase?                           committed to at the Commitment step
                                                                                                                 that should be no more than six months
                                                                                                                 from receipt of a reservation letter.




Sarah       Innovative     Tiebreakers      Universal Design. We are very supportive of advancing                Based on similar feedback, OHCS is
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                    accessibility and Universal Design. However, without a               replacing "Universal Design" with
                                            current definition of Universal Design, the first tiebreaker is      "Enhanced Accessibility." OHCS has also
                                            difficult to evaluate. It is possible that there will be more        included specific requirements to meet
                                            projects that meet one of the three criteria included than           this standard.
                                            there are resources available, as Universal Design is
                                            potentially accessible for all projects. Depending on how
                                            intense the criteria are for Universal Design, it could become
                                            a threshold criteria or a new b or c. The lack of a definition of
                                            Universal Design is a large challenge for Sponsors going into
                                            this first funding round.




                                                                                                                                                  86 |
                                                             2025 Oregon QAP

Sarah       Innovative       Basis Boost      pg. 9, Line 23, Clarify: how will OHCS evaluate Universal          Based on similar feedback, OHCS is
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                      Design standards objectively                                       replacing "Universal Design" with
                                                                                                                 "Enhanced Accessibility." OHCS has also
                                                                                                                 included specific requirements to meet
                                                                                                                 this standard.




Sarah       Innovative        Affordability   Pg 19, 60-year affordability should be across-the-board for all   | OHCS has been working towards this over
Stevenson   Housing, Inc   —— Period          OHCS-funded projects. QAP language is confusing andleaves           the past several years and will continue to
                                              the door open for 30-year affordability on 4% projects.             push on it. Most OHCS programs now are
                                                                                                                  at this 60 year minimum.




Sarah       Innovative       Preservation     Pg 18, Line 1-9, Preservation Tiebreakers- Based on phrasing,      We have revised the tiebreakers from the
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                      it appears that preservation criteria are pass/fail and are not    previous version, but it's true that other
                                              weighted in any way, which disadvantages projects with             priorities are weighted more in the
                                              physical challenges (which may have also been factors in rent      revised tiebreakers.
                                              increases).




                                                                                                                                                 87 |Page
                                                          2025 Oregon QAP

Sarah       Innovative     PAB & 4%        Pg 11, Line 28-30, Clarify: What selection impact is meant by     The order of applications will be based on
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                   “in alignment with the estimated closing date”.                   a first complete, first reviewed process
                                                                                                             based on the developer's estimated
                                                                                                             closing date.




Sarah       Innovative     Basis Boost     pg. 9, Line 15-19 & pg. 16, Line 25-26, Clarify: How will OHCS    OHCS moved the efficiency tiebreaker
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                   ensure the Boosted Projects aren't negatively affected by the     down the priority list, below several
                                           9% tiebreaker of Efficient Unit Production?                       project types eligible for the basis boost.




Sarah       Innovative     Developer Fee   Prior versions of the QAP included a table of maximum             The developer fee will be in the GPGM
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                   developer fee for various project and funding types. By           and will not be changed from the
                                           leaving it out and defaulting to the General Policy and           previously used LIHTC developer fees.
                                           Guideline Manual, the effect is to cut maximum     fees for tax
                                           credit projects by 2%. Developer fee not only acknowledges
                                           the resources required to develop a project but also the risk,
                                           which is greater in a tax credit project with its myriad
                                           regulations, costs and guarantees.




                                                                                                                                             88 |Page
                                                         2025 Oregon QAP

Sarah       Innovative     Project        Pg 8, Line 33-34, Clarify: next steps after formal notification of   | Thank you for your feedback. The QAP
Stevenson   Housing, Inc   Performance    a material project change.                                             describes next steps after formal
                           Guidelines                                                                            notification of a material change.




Sarah       Innovative     Preservation   Pg 16, Line 30-32, Rephrase: specify “projects with expiring          We're defining this as "projects whose
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                  affordability”                                                        last affordability restrictions expire within
                                                                                                                the next seven years”




Sarah       Innovative     Project        Pg 8, Line 33-34, Clarify what constitutes a “material change”       | Thank you for your feedback, this section
Stevenson   Housing, Inc   Performance    in the project's development costs or a financing source?              has been edited to include what
                           Guidelines     (Note that #7/OpEx quantifies this as 10% which is clearer             constitutes a material change.




                                                                                                                                                 89|Page
                                                               2025 Oregon QAP

Sarah       Innovative     Definitions         Providing consistent, objective definitions regarding what         OHCS will ensure the definition used for
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                       constitutes a project change, and predictability as to what        material change in the ORCA is used
                                               actions OHCS may take as a result. For clarity and                 across the board.
                                               predictability, we recommend aligning definitions about what
                                               constitutes a “material change”, “substantial change” and
                                               “project changes” and what actions OHCS may take as a
                                               result “re-evaluation” “reconsideration”. In addition, we
                                               recommend     creating objective standards (10% change in total
                                               project cost) that will not overburden the sponsor or OHCS
                                               with reporting or evaluating, such as would be created by
                                               requiring an action and evaluation of every change in project
                                               cost or every design element.
Sarah       Innovative     Preservation        Pg 17, Preservation Project Criteria- Comment:      Consider       This is a great suggestion, and we will
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                       instead of restating Critical Priority here, refer to the          consider implementing this for the next
                                               Preservation Framework. That way, you can update the               QAP.
                                               Preservation Critical Criteria as needed without needing to
                                               also update the QAP. Seems like that would provide more
                                               both more flexibility and more clarity.




Sarah       Innovative     Minimum       Tax   Pg 18-19, Line 30-3, Is there a better way to get to the desired   Thank you for your feedback, OHCS will
Stevenson   Housing, Inc   Equity Pay-in       outcome? For instance, there may be greater value in               remove this from the QAP.
                           Schedule            negotiating to have equity paid in later to increase the price
                                               beyond what the interest cost will be for having to borrow
                                               additional funds, resulting in a net gain. This equation may
                                               also be impacted by the timing of the payments (how close
                                               they are to quarters or year end). Constraining negotiations
                                               that may ultimately be of benefit to the project's bottom line
                                               seems unnecessary, adds another burden to the process, and
                                               is potentially harmful.




                                                                                                                                                90 |
                                                          2025 Oregon QAP

Sarah       Innovative     Preservation    Pg 18, Line 1-9, Preservation Tiebreakers- How is rent burden   We removed    rent burden from the
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                   evaluated? Against CURRENT rents, or against MAX rents? If      revised tiebreakers.
                                           current rents, this disadvantages sponsors who have kept
                                           rents artificially low by choice (to meet community need
                                           and/or because area rents wouldn’t easily support higher
                                           rents) or because of OHCS policy on increases.




Sarah       Innovative     Conduit Bond    Annual Charge on Balance:     It is unclear what is meant by    By outstanding balance, we mean the
Stevenson   Housing, Inc   Charges         outstanding balance. Is this the amount undrawn or drawn?       drawn amount.
                                           We recommend eliminating this charge. Overall, the increase
                                           in bond fees across the board is troubling.   These cost
                                           increases from the State may have unintended consequences
                                           that ultimately make bond deals more difficult than they
                                           already are.




Sarah       Innovative     Affordability   Pg 19, Line 26-30, Does the Waiver of Qualified Contract        Thank you for the feedback, change
Stevenson   Housing, Inc   Period          section conflict with this?                                     made.




                                                                                                                                         91|Page
                                                         2025 Oregon QAP

Sarah       Innovative     PAB             Pg 12, Line 26, We recommend the phrase “may be” instead       Thank you for your feedback.
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                   of “will be”




Sarah       Innovative     PAB             Pg 12, Line 31, We recommend including a comment that          Thank you for your feedback.
Stevenson   Housing, Inc                   OHCS has the discretion to consider other conditions outside
                                           of the sponsor’s control to not be substantial changes




Sarah       Innovative     Affordability   “Gap only” projects are currently moving through HSC with      Thank you for your feedback.
Stevenson   Housing, Inc   Period          only 30-year affordability commitments.




                                                                                                                                         92|Page
                                                           2025 Oregon QAP

Sarah         Innovative     Basis Boost    pg. 9, Lines 15-19, Will 4% LIHTC projects remain eligible for   Yes
Stevenson     Housing, Inc                  basis boost?




Erica Mills   Neighbor-      Supplemental   Criteria such as low AMI, cost-efficiency, PSH, and TODs are     While projects that are located in TODs
              works          and            all biased against rural projects. OHCS should include ruralas   are eligible for basis boost in the QAP, so
              Umpqua         Tiebreaker     a weighted priority criterion and ensure that all tie-breaker    are any project located in rural
                             Criteria       rules are equitable for rural communities.                       communities. TODs are listed as an
                                                                                                             example for how a project could
                                                                                                             demonstrate "including features in the
                                                                                                             design, services, site location or other
                                                                                                             project considerations that provide
                                                                                                             opportunities for employment to
                                                                                                             residents and benefit community", but is
                                                                                                             certainly not the only way that it can be
                                                                                                             demonstrated;   listed examples also refer
                                                                                                             to location proximity to jobs and can
                                                                                                             include any number of options that are
                                                                                                             applicable to rural communities. Subsidy
                                                                                                             limits are higher in rural communities to
                                                                                                             acknowledge the operational needs in
                                                                                                             rural communities.




                                                                                                                                                93|Page
                                                          2025 Oregon QAP

Erica Mills   Neighbor-   Co-Located       Institutional childcare models are not effective in rural areas,   We will be referencing the definition at
              works       Childcare        where informal, home-based childcare is more prevalent. It         Oregon Admin Code 813-125-0011 for
              Umpqua      Requirements     may be very challenging for ECEs in rural projects to remain       what qualifies as an “ECE facility”. The
                                           open, risking long term commercial vacancies. Further,             definition includes regulated subsidy
                                           requiring home-based-childcare-ready units in rural projects       providers, registered family child care,
                                           is impractical and also risks creating long-term vacancies.        certified family child care, and certified
                                                                                                              child care center. Registered family and
                                                                                                              certified family child care are typically
                                                                                                              provided within residential homes.

                                                                                                              Our emphasis on co-located ECE facilities
                                                                                                              was informed by a recent study we
                                                                                                              conducted that showed the urgent need
                                                                                                              for more childcare facilities in rural
                                                                                                              Oregon. The study provided examples of
                                                                                                              models that will work in those
                                                                                                              communities, as well as case studies.
Erica Mills   Neighbor-   Transportation   The emphasis on public transportation and scoring criteria for     While projects that are located in TODs
              works       Bias             Transportation-Oriented    Districts (TODs) disadvantages rural    are eligible for basis boost in the QAP, so
              Umpqua                       areas, where public transportation is often nonexistent or         are any project located in rural
                                           limited. TODs exist only in select urban areas, making this        communities. TODs are listed as an
                                           criterion unattainable for the majority of the state. OHCS         example for how a project could
                                           must adjust these criteria to account for the realities of rural   demonstrate "including features in the
                                           geography and infrastructure.                                      design, services, site location or other
                                                                                                              project considerations that provide
                                                                                                              opportunities for employment to
                                                                                                              residents and benefit community", but is
                                                                                                              certainly not the only way that it can be
                                                                                                              demonstrated;    listed examples also refer
                                                                                                              to location proximity to jobs and can
                                                                                                              include any number of options that are
                                                                                                              applicable to rural communities.




                                                                                                                                                 94 |
                                                            2025 Oregon QAP

Erica Mills   Neighbor-   General            The QAP draft in its current form perpetuates systemic            LIHTC resources will be allocated to
              works                          inequities that disadvantage rural projects and organizations.    projects through the ORCA process, which
              Umpqua                         Rural communities face unique challenges, including higher        has a funding set aside available to
                                             costs of doing business, food deserts, stagnating or declining    culturally specific organizations and
                                             economies, limited talent pools, scarce resources, limited        nonprofits developing in rural areas. This
                                             partners or limited partner capacity, and fewer funding           set-aside is intended to address the issues
                                             opportunities. OHCS must consider these realities to ensure       that are cited in this comment. Other
                                             equitable access to LIHTC and other funding resources across      ORCA policies are intentional in striving to
                                             the OHCS portfolio.                                               respond to the market realities in rural
                                                                                                               communities, including higher subsidy
                                                                                                               limits for rural projects, rural capacity and
                                                                                                               predevelopment investments, and
                                                                                                               regional set-asides.
Erica Mills   Neighbor-   First Come         This approach inherently disadvantages smaller, rural, and        The ORCA has a funding set aside
              works       First Serve   re   lower-capacity organizations in favor of larger, well-resourced   available to culturally specific
              Umpqua      ORCA               and/or urban entities. Rural organizations often lack the         organizations and nonprofits developing
                                             bandwidth to compete quickly in funding cycles. This dynamic      in rural areas. This set-aside is intended
                                             forces rural groups to partner with for-profit entities or        to address the issues that are cited in this
                                             consultants, which can lead to financial exploitation, reduced    comment. Additionally, while ORCA
                                             developer fees, and projects that are unsustainable in the        allows project developments to move
                                             long term. OHCS must reevaluate this process to ensure            swiftly through the funding process to
                                             equitable access.                                                 receive final funding commitment before
                                                                                                               financial close, it also provides up to 6
                                                                                                               months in the financial review process for
                                                                                                               those who need additional time to
                                                                                                               complete needed diligence.
Erica Mills   Neighbor-   Per Unit Cost      Prioritizing cost efficiency leads to value engineering that      OHCS deprioritized this tiebreaker.
              works       Efficiency         compromises long-term sustainability, resulting in rapid          Federal and state requirements prohibit
              Umpqua                         physical deterioration and financial distress. Developers         the construction of low quality units with
                                             should be rewarded for creating durable, long-term                limited life-spans. The state also has
                                             investments that prioritize quality and resilience over short-    limited resources and the need is great.
                                             term cost savings. Projects should be investments in a            As everyone doing this work knows this is
                                             healthy future, rather than a race to assemble low-quality        a balancing act of getting the most units
                                             units with limited life-spans.                                    for the highest quality possible with the
                                                                                                               resources that the state is choosing to
                                                                                                               invest in affordable housing
                                                                                                               development.



                                                                                                                                                95 |
                                                       2025 Oregon QAP

Erica Mills   Neighbor-   Project       The draft QAP penalizes projects for changes in Total Project     OHCS allows projects to provide updated
              works       Changes       Costs, Operating Revenue, or Financing Sources without            financial information around the cost of
              Umpqua                    adequately accounting for external factors such as new            the project, and relies on development
                                        tariffs, workforce shortages, or changes to Build America Buy     teams to do the needed diligence to meet
                                        America (BABA) regulations. OHCS must introduce flexibility       standards in the ORCA to receive finalized
                                        to accommodate such economic shifts and ensure projects           funding commitment from the state.
                                        remain viable despite unforeseen challenges.                      OHCS includes reasonability standards to
                                                                                                          ensure that projects are only coming to
                                                                                                          the state when they are ready to
                                                                                                          proceed. OHCS understands that projects
                                                                                                          change and allows for flexibility, but has
                                                                                                          standards that can and have been met by
                                                                                                          developers that understand as fully as
                                                                                                          possible their project and its budget
                                                                                                          before receiving a funding commitment
                                                                                                          from the state.
Erica Mills   Neighbor-   Cost          | would like 1st to underscore what Traci was just saying         Subsidy limits have been increased
(Public       works       Escalations   about cost escalations and the punitive QAP items in              significantly by the state at the launch of
Hearing)      Umpqua                    response to that. And | think, as we're entering a new Federal    the ORCA. We are unable to affect
                                        administration, and we can fully anticipate that there's going    changes at the federal or macroeconomic
                                        to be some implications that may dramatically impact the          level that may impact projects, but do not
                                        cost of construction in the near future, that it would be wise    want to preempt things that have not
                                        to incorporate some proactive response to that, so that we're     manifested yet with major policy changes
                                        not putting you in a position where you're having to create       and provide less resources to less projects
                                        exceptions and waivers on a regular basis.                        that need them right now.

Erica Mills   Neighbor-   Need for a    The current draft contains significant areas of concern. A        OHCS is unable to extend our
              works       Second        second comment    period after revisions is essential to ensure   engagement further and still utilize the
              Umpqua      Comment       meaningful stakeholder engagement and equitable                   tax credits we receive in 2025; OHCS has
                          Period        outcomes.                                                         engaged on issues related to application
                                                                                                          process, resources, and tax credits over
                                                                                                          the past year and will engage in the
                                                                                                          future related to other change
                                                                                                          opportunities.




                                                                                                                                           96 |
                                                        2025 Oregon QAP

Erica Mills   Neighbor-   Universal      Universal design principles must be clearly defined and           Based on similar feedback, OHCS is
              works       Design         adapted for rural projects. Preservation projects may face        replacing "Universal Design" with
              Umpqua      Requirements   prohibitive costs to meet universal design standards, making      "Enhanced Accessibility." OHCS has also
                                         this requirement inequitable for rehabilitation efforts, which    included specific requirements to meet
                                         are disproportionately relevant in rural communities.             this standard. This standard is not
                                                                                                           applicable to preservation projects, which
                                                                                                           have separate evaluation criteria
                                                                                                           beginning on page 18.


Erica Mills   Neighbor-   Bias toward    PSH is far more challenging to implement in rural areas due to    Thank you for your feedback. OHCS has
              works       PSH            limited partner organizations, workforce capacity, general        made deliberate capacity investments in
              Umpqua                     operational challenges and scarce funding. OHCS must ensure       rural communities seeking to engage in
                                         that prioritization of PSH does not come at the expense of        providing supportive housing in a direct
                                         rural projects.                                                   acknowledgement that the network of
                                                                                                           needed partnerships is complex and has
                                                                                                           unique challenges in rural communities.




Erica Mills   Neighbor-   Lower AMI      Serving lower AMI residents increases operational costs due       LIHTC is not legally allowed to be used for
              works       Residents      to higher demands for durable materials, intensive property       any units over 60% area median      income
              Umpqua                     management, and high-touch resident services. In rural areas,     (AMI) unless the project is using average
                                         where support services and operational capacity are minimal,      income. When    using average income 80%
                                         these challenges are amplified. OHCS should recognize the         AM is the legal limit. OHCS provides
                                         higher per-unit costs required to serve these populations         higher subsidy per unit for units restricted
                                         sustainably. Incentivizing large percentages of lower AMI         at lower AMI levels.
                                         units, or disincentivizing diverse AMI mixes, threaten the long
                                         term operational viability of a project, and drive a need for
                                         urgent recapitalization and/or rehabilitation upon LHTC
                                         Investor exit. Incentivizing higher AMI units, such as 80%-
                                         120% could improve project performance in the short and
                                         long term, while also improving human and social outcomes.




                                                                                                                                           97|Page
                                                          2025 Oregon QAP

Erica Mills   Neighbor-   Subjective       Evaluation criteria based on "reasonableness" are too               OHCS relies on information provided to
              works       "Reasonablen     subjective and fail to account for rural-specific cost drivers,     justify the costs of the development as
              Umpqua      ess" Criteria    such as limited contractor availability and higher operational      the source for reasonability; any further
                                           expenses. OHCS must define "reasonable" in a way that is            dictation by the state about what
                                           equitable and context-sensitive.                                    reasonability means will have the impact
                                                                                                               of limiting flexibility and ability to be
                                                                                                               responsive.




Erica Mills   Neighbor-   Separate         To address the unique challenges rural projects face, OHCS          Thank you for your feedback.   The criteria
              works       Scoring          should implement entirely separate scoring criteria for rural       established are not scored, and will allow
              Umpqua      Criteria for     projects and/or rural-based organizations.                          projects in communities statewide to
                          Rural Projects                                                                       meet them and be considered for
                                                                                                               resources within their geographic region
                                                                                                               or other set-aside.




Erica Mills   Neighbor-   Sustainability   Sustainability requirements must align with Oregon                  This has been a topic of engagement and
              works       Standards and    Department of Energy initiatives and ORMEP       program            discussion both internally and externally
              Umpqua      Climate          guidelines while addressing rural-specific needs. For example,      for several years now, and will continue
                          Resilience       wildfire mitigation (e.g., tree or brush removal), air filtration   to be moving forward to find the best
                                           or sealing for smoke, and backup generators are critical rural      path towards climate resilience.
                                           climate resilience measures. These may not produce any
                                           energy savings but are essential for protecting health and
                                           Safety.




                                                                                                                                              98 |
                                                         2025 Oregon QAP

Erica Mills   Neighbor-   Long-Term        The combination of long-term affordability and 20-year          OHCS finances projects that are to remain
              works       Affordability    resyndication restrictions is incongruous with low AMI, low     affordable and viable for 60 years of
              Umpqua      and              subsidy per unit, and high efficiency criteria. These           operations; it is not feasible to re-invest
                          Resyndication    requirements place an undue burden on rural projects, which     in the entire affordable portfolio every 20
                          Restrictions     are more expensive to build and operate. The rigid
                                           restrictions exacerbate financial instability for rural
                                           developments, making it harder to sustain high-quality
                                           housing over time.




Erica Mills   Neighbor-   Criteria for     Rural organizations and CSOs face similar challenges and        Thank you for your feedback. CSOs and
              works       CSOs and         should be treated equitably in mandatory, supplemental, and     Rural nonprofit development are both
              Umpqua      Rural            tie-breaker criteria. Both should be heavily weighted to        within the same set-aside with dedicated
                          Organizations    ensure fair competition for LIHTC resources.                    resources for gap subsidy in the ORCA.




Erica Mills   Neighbor-   Local Planning   Mandatory alignment with local jurisdiction Housing             Small cities (under 10,000 population) are
              works                        Production Strategies (HPS) unfairly penalizes rural            exempt from this criteria, as stated on
              Umpqua                       communities that are not required to complete these             page 16, lines 17-18.
                                           strategies until after LIHTC rounds. OHCS must address this
                                           misalignment to avoid excluding rural projects.   OHNA places
                                           burdens on rural municipal governments without additional
                                           funding or capacity building to accomplish the requirements.
                                           Many rural communities may fail to be compliant with OHNA
                                           obligations and deadlines. Tying funding awards to local
                                           government performance unfairly punishes rural projects,
                                           and arguably perpetuates an economic death spiral.




                                                                                                                                          99|Page
                                                             2025 Oregon QAP

Destin         Northwest      Developer Fee   Do you know if or where developer fee is addressed in the        The developer fee calculation has always
Ferdun         Housing                        draft QAP? | am trying to trace the allowed/proposed             been inclusive of both cash and deferred
(forwarded     Alternatives                   Developer Fees under the new 4% QAP, (and for that matter        fee.
to the QAP                                    ORCA.) It looks to me like the 4% guidelines are silent on it
email)                                        and refer underwriting to the ORCA, and the ORCA refers to
                                              the General Policy Management Guidelines, and the
                                              Guidelines are linked below: | am hoping that a few words are
                                              missing from the general guidelines and that the first section
                                              with the 16%/14%/12%/10% table is referring to Cash
                                              Developer Fee? rather than the Total developer fee (cash,
                                              deferred, invested)?


                                              Often we try to maximize basis in projects in order to
                                              maximize private equity investment and reduce public
                                              subsidy dollars needed. In recalculating an earlier project
                                              where we had a max of 15% total developer fee (cash,
                                              deferred, and invested.) compared to listed 10% listed for an
                                              over a 100 unit project, the delta of private equity is a
                                              startling loss, about 1.5M at 85 cents yield. Are there
                                              opportunities to maximize basis through use of “Invested
                                              Developer Fee” or utilize the full availed Deferred Developer
                                              Fee available from 15 year cash flow?
Lydia Slocum   NW Housing     Basis Boost     Consider using HUD definition of rural project for 30% basis     OHCS has received significant negative
                                              boost to align with federal program.                             feedback in the past for using multiple
                                                                                                               definitions of rural for different programs.
                                                                                                               Our research team did significant
                                                                                                               research into best practices and data
                                                                                                               used nationally and arrived at the
                                                                                                               definition being used now.




                                                                                                                                              100 |
                                                                2025 Oregon QAP

Lydia Slocum   NW Housing         Mandatory      please describe on how Responsive to Community Needs             This will be a 1 to 2 sentence narrative
                                  Criteria       criterion #2 (aligns with OHNA) will be evaluated through the    demonstrating understanding of the
                                                 ORCA. Will this be a check the box or narrative?                 jurisdiction's needs, whether unit income
                                                                                                                  levels or defined populations, as
                                                                                                                  described in OHNA data or HPS if
                                                                                                                  available.
Lydia Slocum   NW Housing     | General          ORCA underwriting parameters are not aligned with LIHTC          OHCS is not updating its developer fees
                                                 processes nor listed in QAP. Current ORCA underwriting           for LIHTC. They will be in an updated
                                                 should not be assumed to meet LIHTC project needs.               table in the GPGM with the gap only
                                                 Therefore, it is critical to see these in draft to comment and   developer fees and will be unchanged
                                                 provide input on the QAP, also to meet the project planning      from the prior QAP table.
                                                 and preparation timelines, and commit funds to moving
                                                 projects forward. Example: ORCA total developer fee is low
                                                 and anticipates direct grant programs, whereas Developer
                                                 Fee for LIHTC projects is basis eligible and an important tool
                                                 for the Investors to not recognize profit during the 15 year
                                                 LIHTC period. Therefore it is crucial that Total Developer Fee
                                                 be at higher levels for LIHTC to take full advantage of basis
                                                 eligible deferred developer fee and other risk management
                                                 scenarios.
Lydia Slocum   NW   Housing       Supplemental   define “rural nonprofit organization.” Does this mean rural-     This means a project located in a rural
                                  Criteria       serving or physically located in a rural area. In either case,   area as defined by OHCS through the
                                                 also clarify if this criterion uses HUD or ORCA definition of    ORCA definition.
                                                 rural.




Lydia Slocum   NW   Housing   |   Project        Pg 12, Page - LIHTC Allocation Application Process - Project     Same feedback for the same language
                                  Performance    Performance Guidelines: clarity needed on what constitutes a     included in “PAB Award Calculations and
                                  Guidelines     change in “total project costs” (item d(5)). Recommend a         Commitments”
                                                 change of 10% or more, to align with other areas of the QAP
                                                 and ORCA.




                                                                                                                                                101 |
                                                             2025 Oregon QAP

Lydia Slocum     NW Housing   Equity Pay in   please consider the potential negative consequences of this         Thank you for your feedback, OHCS will
                              Schedule        requirement — with strict requirements for pay in, investors        remove this from the QAP.
                                              may lower pricing to reflect lack of competition / appetite for
                                              deals.


Danell Norby   = Portland     Overall         Need to include opportunities to align with local priorities,       Thank you for this feedback. Related to
                 Housing                      particularly prioritizing projects with significant local funding   the QAP for 9% LIHTC project selection,
                 Bureau                       commitments. Relying on ORCA readiness/a fully funded               we have expanded our tie-breakers to
                                              budget as a proxy for local commitment does not necessarily         include projects that have local HOME, or
                                              result in alignment with local priorities. Projects that seek 4%    Community Development Block Grant
                                              LIHTC without local PHB investment, for example, tend to            Funds (CDBG), Tax Increment Finance, or
                                              include shallower affordability, fewer family-sized units, and      another OHCS-approved place-based
                                              fewer PSH units compared to PHB-awarded         projects. They      economic development fund that is
                                              may therefore have a simpler capital stack and demonstrate a        awarded for gap funding by Participating
                                              fully funded budget more easily than projects requiring PHB         Jurisdictions in lieu of HOME,   in an effort
                                              gap financing.                                                      to support alignment with funding
                                                                                                                  partners seeking to utilize time-sensitive
                                                                                                                  leveraged funds. Additionally the
                                                                                                                  efficient unit production measure will
                                                                                                                  preference projects with other local
                                                                                                                  resources committed to the project.
Danell Norby   = Portland     9%              Participating Jurisdiction: Tiebreaker should include               Thank you for this feedback. The intent is
                 Housing      Tiebreakers     significant local jurisdiction leverage from any funding source,    to maximally leverage federal subsidies.
                 Bureau                       not limited to HOME funding.                                        Related to the QAP for 9% LIHTC project
                                                                                                                  selection, we have expanded our tie-
                                                                                                                  breakers to include projects that have
                                                                                                                  local HOME, or Community Development
                                                                                                                  Block Grant Funds (CDBG), Tax Increment
                                                                                                                  Finance, or another OHCS-approved
                                                                                                                  place-based economic development fund
                                                                                                                  that is awarded for gap funding by
                                                                                                                  Participating Jurisdictions in lieu of
                                                                                                                  HOME, in an effort to support alignment
                                                                                                                  with funding partners seeking to utilize
                                                                                                                  time-sensitive leveraged funds.




                                                                                                                                                   102 |
                                                       2025 Oregon QAP

Danell Norby   Portland   9%             Efficient Unit Production: Ranking based on credits per unit   OHCS's subsidy limits are scaled to
               Housing    Tiebreakers    means that projects with smaller units (SROs/studios/1 BRs)    bedroom sizes, which gives significantly
               Bureau                    will be ranked higher than those with larger units. Suggest    more funding to projects with more
                                         ranking based on credits per bedroom instead of per unit, to   bedrooms. The overall limit on available
                                         not disincentivize family sized units.                         gap financing along with this tiebreaker
                                                                                                        calculating on a per unit basis attempts to
                                                                                                        not disincentivize smaller unit sizes if they
                                                                                                        make sense for the project and
                                                                                                        community; additionally local
                                                                                                        jurisdictions who are able to invest to
                                                                                                        support development in the community
                                                                                                        would provide advantage to projects in
                                                                                                        the application process.
Danell Norby   Portland   ORCA Process   OHCS should consider more strategically matching projects      Strategically matching projects to
               Housing                   with available resources instead of letting sponsors choose    available resources is the intent of the
               Bureau                    which resource they are in line for                            ORCA. OHCS is working to incorporate
                                                                                                        LIHTC as directly as possible while
                                                                                                        accounting for the differences in early
                                                                                                        project planning that comes from using
                                                                                                        that resource, and will strive to improve
                                                                                                        alignment over time. OHCS has stood up a
                                                                                                        new Technical Advisor team that is
                                                                                                        providing assistance to project sponsors
                                                                                                        on their applications including resources.
Danell Norby   Portland   ORCA Process   Need more up-front controls early in ORCA (e.g., at impact     We appreciate this comment. The impact
               Housing                   assessment) to distinguish viable projects from non-viable     assessment step of the ORCA is to assess
               Bureau                    projects                                                       the project's viability as it relates to
                                                                                                        program and policy requirements. The
                                                                                                        financial eligibility step then evaluates the
                                                                                                        financial viability of the project. Final
                                                                                                        commitment of resources occurs 6
                                                                                                        months prior to financial closing, allowing
                                                                                                        OHCS to rescind resource holds for
                                                                                                        projects unable to meet standards at any
                                                                                                        step.




                                                                                                                                         103 |Page
                                                          2025 Oregon QAP

Danell Norby   Portland   ORCA   Process   Need grace periods to meet major milestones particularly          OHCS commits to working with partners
               Housing                     closer to closing. For example, a 90-day extension to reach       around their projects, while also
               Bureau                      closing before the project moves back to an earlier ORCA step     committing to fairness in the process to
                                                                                                             other projects that are more ready to
                                                                                                             proceed and can close in the agreed upon
                                                                                                             window. OHCS encourages projects to
                                                                                                             come to receive funding as prepared as
                                                                                                             possible to move as quickly as possible.


Danell Norby   Portland   Affordability    Ensure that all OHCS funding includes 60 years of affordability   OHCS has been working towards this over
               Housing    Period           at minimum                                                        the past several years and will continue to
               Bureau                                                                                        incorporate updates as is possible given
                                                                                                             our financing tools. Most OHCS programs
                                                                                                             now are at this 60 year minimum.

Danell Norby   Portland   Preservation     Census tracts with greater rent burden (greater share of rent     We have modified the preservation
               Housing    Tiebreakers      burdened   households) may not be the most effective metric,      tiebreakers in response to feedback like
               Bureau                      if seeking to identify tracts where displaced residents would     this; rent burden is no longer a
                                           have difficulty finding replacement housing. For example,         tiebreaker.
                                           census tracts that have already gentrified may have more
                                           expensive rents but a lower share of rent-burdened
                                           households, if many low-income households have already
                                           been displaced. Suggest replacing this with a metric such as
                                           census tracts with a lower share of units affordable to
                                           low/mod-income    households.




                                                                                                                                           104 |
                                                 2025 Oregon QAP

Kathleen   REACH   ORCA QAP       Layering the QAP onto the ORCA is counter-intuitive to the          It is unclear what entry points you are
Mertz              Alignment      national affordable housing tax credit industry’s                   referencing, but one of the primary
                                  understanding of how to administer this program and                 intents of the creation of the ORCA was
                                  execute on affordable housing unit production with                  to make a predictable process. Layering
                                  expediency. The ORCA does not follow industry expectations          LIHTC into that will help make that more
                                  about soft funding commitments,      readiness to process,          predictable as well, but as we integrate it
                                  private market underwriting criteria. Rather than creating a        for the first time we are having to align
                                  new process, it is most helpful for developers to have a very       midstream. There will only be one entry
                                  predictable process. Real estate development is a high-risk         point - the Intake Form. All criteria
                                  activity and the State is well suited to support this production    needed to receive a funding award are
                                  by simplifying, streamlining, and expediting resource delivery.     published and if a project can meet them
                                  Having 3+ entry points for funding at a “one stop shop”             they will receive a funding award when
                                  complicates this, not to mention the intense vulnerability of       resources are available. We believe this is
                                  being on a waitlist with no transparency about when and how         incredibly predictable, especially
                                  a project will be funded.                                           compared with our previous processes
                                                                                                      involving 10 or more NOFAs with
                                                                                                      separate criteria and scoring processes.
Kathleen   REACH   Conduit Bond   Additionally, the project should not cost more money related        We do believe that the complexity of
Mertz              Charges        to issuance fees just because the bond size is larger. This         bond issuance has changed since 2019:
                                  paperwork and other requirements are the same for a                 larger issuances, more complex
                                  $50,000 bond as for a $50,000,000. The legal documents do           structures, and increases in the fees OHCS
                                  not increase in length, nor does the TEFRA hearing costs, HSC       pays to legal/financial advisors. Projects
                                  costs, wire transfers, email traffic, electronic processing, etc.   that cost more money are using more of a
                                  If this is not the case, the state should supply the detailed       limited and constrained resources, and all
                                  data related to each bond transaction so that the public can        charges collected go back into OHCS'
                                  see exactly how the costs are being incurred before making          mission to provide stable and affordable
                                  any changes to the program fees.                                    housing and consider how to make our
                                                                                                      funding streams and resources more
                                                                                                      sustainable.




                                                                                                                                     105 |
                                                   2025 Oregon QAP

Kathleen   REACH   Project          Pg 11, Line 31, how is the State proposing to strive to              OHCS updated our funding processes to
Mertz              Selection        maximize leverage? | think the developer should be able to           make most efficient use of state
                   Process          propose the financing structure they think best fits the             resources in as timely a manner as
                                    project.                                                             possible. This includes PAB and will be
                                                                                                         incorporated as such. We will work with
                                                                                                         partners on their needs for specific
                                                                                                         projects, but also reserve the ability to
                                                                                                         adjust the program through which
                                                                                                         resources are provided where it helps
                                                                                                         support those goals.
Kathleen   REACH   Tiebreakers-     Pg 16, Line 25, Efficient unit production should be the last         OHCS understands the concerns around
Mertz              Efficient Unit   criteria used as market forces for material and labor costs are      market conditions but also must balance
                   Production       totally out of the control of the developer so the credit per        the need for stewardship of public
                                    unit is a false indicator of strength/need of a project.             resources and need to make the most
                                                                                                         efficient investments possible to get the
                                                                                                         most from the limited amount of credits
                                                                                                         available. This tiebreaker has been
                                                                                                         lowered on the list but is still an
                                                                                                         important consideration.

Kathleen   REACH   General          Pg 3, Line 33, Capitalize “Historic” so there is a clear reference   This was not updated due to the nuance
Mertz                               to formally identified historic properties, rather than just         of the property not needing to necessarily
                                    older properties                                                     be formally identified as historic in the
                                                                                                         National Register of Historic Places, so
                                                                                                         long as it is in a registered historic district
                                                                                                         and certified as being of historic
                                                                                                         significance by the Secretary of the US
                                                                                                         Dept of Interior.




                                                                                                                                          106 |Page
                                                    2025 Oregon QAP

Kathleen   REACH   Project          Pg 17, Line 12, What is the criteria for evaluation of “currently    Risk of loss in this category is defined in
Mertz              Criteria: Risk   at risk”?                                                            the Preservation Funding Framework as
                   of Loss                                                                               "the property has urgent repair needs
                   Physical                                                                              and/or operational losses that can’t be
                                                                                                         addressed through existing reserves or
                                                                                                         cash flow, and those challenges threaten
                                                                                                         the housing stability and/or health and
                                                                                                         well-being of tenants."


Kathleen   REACH   Mandatory        Pg 15, Line 20, If a project is put on a PHA waitlist, that should   Having a commitment from a local
Mertz              Criteria         only be a marketing opportunity, not an evaluation criteria          Housing Authority demonstrating they
                                    for whether the project meets community needs. |                     will market available units to their waitlist
                                    recommend     this criteria change to reflect developer/manager      is a required selection criteria in Code.
                                    experience with LIHTC compliance. This is a high stakes IRS          Developer experience is a standard in the
                                    program that includes recapture risk that could bankrupt a           ORCA Impact Assessment step that all
                                    sponsor if they don’t have the appropriate experience to             projects must meet to be considered for a
                                    participate, or are not partnered with an experience                 funding recommendation.
                                    developer or manager. Ultimately, private banks and
                                    investors are in deal for the financial benefits and so they too
                                    need to know the sponsor/developer/PM has experience with
                                    the program or they won’t investor or lend. It behooves the
                                    State to make experience a mandatory criteria for any
                                    allocation of tax credits — this is in the best interest of the
                                    developer and the project’s long term stability and
                                    sustainability.
Kathleen   REACH   Project          Pg 11, Line 36, Is “PAB Timeline Prioritization” a defined           This is not different than the currently
Mertz              Selection        term? What does this mean exactly? This seems like a                 existing ORCA process. What we mean           is
                   Process          subjective process that does not support nonprofit developer         that we will prioritize review of projects
                                    needs for predictability. How will the State guard against a         who are eligible for 2025 PAB/4% (which
                                    project falling apart because it sat on a waitlist for so long       would have to demonstrate that they can
                                    that market forces have changed to financial sustainability of       close in calendar year 2025). That does
                                    it?   For example, a project could pass Impact Assessment but        not mean that projects jump ahead of
                                    not financial eligibility, and be higher on a waitlist than a        other projects, but that we will seek to
                                    project that would fly through financial eligibility and close       commit the 2025 PAB resources to
                                    more quickly than the former project.                                projects that demonstrate ability to meet
                                                                                                         that closing timeline.



                                                                                                                                        107 |
                                               2025 Oregon QAP

Kathleen   REACH   Additional   Pg 13, Line 22, This requirement does not take into account          Projects will not be put on a waitlist for
Mertz              Process      waitlist delays. For example, a project proforma could change        9% LIHTC. If a project that was awarded
                                between Impact and Financial Eligibility if it sits on a waitlist    fails to meet standards review, those
                                for 7 months. “a)” should be deleted as a criteria.                  credits will be offered to the project that
                                                                                                     was next in line for tiebreakers. If that
                                                                                                     were to occur, the applicant would be
                                                                                                     given an opportunity to update their
                                                                                                     commitments.

Kathleen   REACH   Project      Pg 24, Line 25, Change in staff contact person should be             The intent is that projects provide notice
Mertz              Changes      removed as a “material change” definition.                           to OHCS with material changes. OHCS
                                                                                                     then has 30 days to respond to give or
                                                                                                     withhold its consent. The staff contact
                                                                                                     person is an important role and OHCS
                                                                                                     needs to receive formal notice when this
                                                                                                     changes to a different person.

Kathleen   REACH   Additional   Pg 14, Line 11, Remove words “character and quality” as they        | OHCS used these broader terms to
Mertz              Process      are subjective terms. The QAP should be an objective process.         encapsulate all commitments being made
                                Design, target population, etc may be more appropriate                in the 9% request form. We will be more
                                words.                                                                clear in documentation but do not feel
                                                                                                      this is the best place to list out every
                                                                                                      project detail. We do appreciate and
                                                                                                      agree on the desired objectivity.




                                                                                                                                    108
                                                                                                                                     | Page
                                                    2025 Oregon QAP

Kathleen   REACH   Conduit Bond     Issuance Charge: Keep the cap, even if it is increased. The cap       Thank you for your feedback. With our
Mertz              Charges          ensure predictability when laying multiple funding sources            current $150k cap, a $10M deal and a
                                    together to pay for all of the bond issuance fees. The issuance       S50M deal pay the same in bond issuance
                                    fee should not exceed $200,000 for all OHCS costs. These              charges, which we do not see as a
                                    costs are not in the control of the developer/sponsor                 reasonable comparison. In our research,
                                    regardless of how big or small the bond issuance amount. In           we did not see many examples of caps on
                                    other states, when there is a 3rd party issuer, developers can        issuance fees for state HFAs.
                                    control costs based on fair market forces of competition that
                                    keep legal fees, for example, in check. In Oregon, the
                                    developer/sponsor is beholden to the state procurement and
                                    hiring process which is not fault of the developer and should
                                    not be borne by project budget, i.e., other soft lenders. There
                                    should be more incentive to reduce the cost of bond
                                    issuance, not increase it.
Kathleen   REACH   Reservation of   Pg 26, Line 23, Doesn’t the State have a “qualified developer”        Thank you for your feedback. The ORCA
Mertz              Rights           process as part of the ORCA? It would be helpful to document          does have a pre-qualification process and
                                    that process in the QAP under this section. Additionally, this        all LIHTC applicants will have to complete
                                    section seems very duplicative of the section                         that process. This section in the QAP
                                    “Project/Request Denial” section on page 28                           transparently lays out OHCS's rights as
                                                                                                          the tax credit allocating agency.

Kathleen   REACH   Basis Boost      Pg 9, Line 22, Are the “permanent supportive housing goals”           OHCS used the word goals in an attempt
Mertz                               quantifiable?   Do you mean   includes dedicated PSH units?      If   to expand beyond simply the creation of
                                    so, spell that out more clearly.                                      units but the wraparound support of
                                                                                                          tenants that is a requirement of the PSH
                                                                                                          model. We understand the confusion
                                                                                                          though and will seek a better framing.

Kathleen   REACH   9% Application   Pg 14, Line 16-33, This is confusing to have multiple queues          The 9% LIHTC projects will have a
Mertz              Process          when 9% is layered with gap sources too. Wouldn’t that lead           different process for selection than
                                    to two waitlists for the same project?                                projects seeking other resources. We will
                                                                                                          rephrase from waitlist to better reflect
                                                                                                          the intent here, which is ranking order for
                                                                                                          the current open 9% round.




                                                                                                                                         109 |
                                                   2025 Oregon QAP

Kathleen   REACH   General          Pg 6, Line 32, Decreasing rents should be removed as an              This tool is one of several available and in
Mertz                               adjustment tool. Project revenue affects too many other              some instances provides a positive
                                    parts and pieces of the underwriting with the private market         outcome for all parties, including tenants.
                                    financing partners.                                                  OHCS will keep this as an option but
                                                                                                         understands that it does not work in all
                                                                                                         situations.

Kathleen   REACH   9% Application   Pg 8, Line 10-24, It seems extra complicated to enter    a 9%        9% LIHTC applications will go through a
Mertz              Process          queue with no connection to ORCA, especially if a project            selection process and if selected, receive
                                    needs both 9% LIHTC and other gap resources. It is unclear           a WorkCenter and proceed through the
                                    how a developer can navigate two points of entry for the             ORCA process. Applicants can request gap
                                    same project. Additionally, if a project needs multiple sources      financing as part of the ORCA process.
                                    of funding, couldn’t it potentially be on two waitlists at the
                                    same time?   The waitlist process is overly complicated and
                                    the predictability of the application process is not clear.


Kathleen   REACH   General          Pg 3, Line 30, Is this a violation of protected classes under Fair   No, this selection criterion is required to
Mertz                               Housing?                                                             be used by Section 42(m)(1)(C) of tax
                                                                                                         credit code from the Internal Revenue
                                                                                                         Service (IRS) and must be followed by tax
                                                                                                         credit allocating agencies.




                                                                                                                                        110
                                                                                                                                         | Page
                                                  2025 Oregon QAP

Kathleen   REACH   Project        Pg 11, Line 29, The “first complete, first reviewed process” is    OHCS has added a Cure Period process
Mertz              Selection      fundamentally flawed. This is entirely based upon State FTE        and more detailed rubrics to streamline
                   Process        resources for review, not actual readiness to proceed. For         our review processes and make criteria
                                  example, my project is listed farther down on the “waitlist”       less subjective, as is the intent of the
                                  based on a timestamp that required a resubmission because a        entire ORCA process.
                                  State staff person asked for additional information that was
                                  not required at the time of the impact assessment
                                  application.   Having a multimillion dollar real estate deal
                                  subjected to staff person review of completeness, when
                                  subjectivity is at play, is not predictability for the nonprofit
                                  development community.        A managed   queue is a good thing,
                                  but a project should not drop down the readiness list for
                                  funding due to wordsmithing of an application narrative nor a
                                  request for additional information. | recommend       more of a
                                  checklist style that a staff person can review the checklist of
                                  items submitted to get into line, rather than relying on the
                                  narrative content description which could be subjected to
                                  personal style.
Kathleen   REACH   Basis Boost/   Pg 9, Line 23, Meeting Universal Design Standards is not a         Based on similar feedback, OHCS is
Mertz              Universal      clear path. This should be removed.                                replacing "Universal Design" with
                   Design                                                                            "Enhanced Accessibility." OHCS has also
                                                                                                     included specific requirements to meet
                                                                                                     this standard.

Kathleen   REACH   Timelines      Pg 13, Line 3, More attention to defining readiness to proceed     All of these components are a part of the
Mertz                             is needed throughout the ORCA process. Permit Ready                ORCA, but OHCS is committed to
                                  letters, soft lender commitments, and any important                continuing to improve our readiness
                                  deadlines associated with the project should be part of the        standard in collaboration with our
                                  readiness evaluation                                               partners.


Kathleen   REACH   Project        Pg 11, Line 33, removed    “and readiness requirements” at the     You are correct, but we felt the need to
Mertz              Selection      end of that sentence. The ORCA process is supposed to take         reiterate within the QAP that prioritizing
                   Process        readiness into account.                                            ready projects is a fundamental goal in
                                                                                                     that stage of the process.




                                                                                                                                     111
                                                                                                                                      | Page
                                                    2025 Oregon QAP

Kathleen   REACH   Re-evaluation    Pg 10, Line 17, when could/would this re-evaluation occur?        The re-evaluation would occur due to one
Mertz              of Reservation   When   does a “Reservation” become an “Allocation” — at           of the events listed in the QAP. Re-
                                    8609? It is good to define it so that developers have             evaluation could occur from reservation
                                    predictability that a reservation wouldn’t be pulled out from     letter to placement in service.
                                    under them whilst during construction due to delays that are
                                    out of their control.


Kathleen   REACH   Tiebreakers-     Pg 16, Line 24, HOME funds are dwindling and with the new         This criterion was created in response to
Mertz              PJs              administration, this doesn’t seem like a compelling matching      HOME PJs across the state asking for
                                    resource that should settle a tie-breaker. Many projects have     consideration of local federal funding in
                                    little or no ability to use significant HOME funds in their       the prioritization process.
                                    project. | recommend changing this tie-breaker criteria to be
                                    either “soft sources” leverage or voluntary reduction of credit
                                    ask.

Kathleen   REACH   Fair Housing     confirm that there is not a disparate impact on protected         OHCS works with our partners at the
Mertz              Act              classes related to the “culturally specific” or “tenant           Department of Justice to confirm legal
                   compliance       populations of individuals with children” references or public    sufficiency of all of our programs and
                                    policy goals.                                                     policies.



Kathleen   REACH   Re-evaluation    Pg 10, Line 18, The ORCA process could take longer than 300       OHCS appreciates this feedback. We are
Mertz              of Reservation   days, which is out of the control of developer and also risks     monitoring this new process and will
                                    timeliness to close.                                              make adjustments based on real-world
                                                                                                      outcomes.




                                                                                                                                    112 |
                                                 2025 Oregon QAP

Kathleen   REACH   Relocation     Pg 20, Line 21, There should be a clarification that this applies    | Thank you for your feedback. OHCS
Mertz              Plan           to “Permanent” Relocation. Temporary relocation fora rehab          — requires a relocation plan for both
                                  should not apply to this section.                                      temporary and permanent relocation of
                                                                                                         tenants.




Kathleen   REACH   Preservation   Pg 18, Line 8, This criteria disincentivized projects that need      We are balancing several competing
Mertz              Tiebreakers    significant capital repairs, which are likely the buildings most     demands in preservation, and properties
                                  in need of preservation dollars. Similar to the other                in need of rehab are just one of these.
                                  tiebreaker section, this could be a leverage or voluntary
                                  reduction of credit requested criteria.




Kathleen   REACH   Financial      Pg 29, Line 4, Sponsor financial strength at any given moment | Thank you for your feedback. The state
Mertz              Solvency       should not define their ability to participate in this program.   will maintain its authority to evaluate
                                  The State is not in a position to “believe” (judge or evaluate) a applicants against this standard.
                                  certification about the financial solvency of an organization.
                                  Experience with owning and operating LIHTC properties is an
                                  objective criteria that can be used for evaluation. This section
                                  should be removed in its entirety.




                                                                                                                                   113 |Page
                                                2025 Oregon QAP

Kathleen   REACH   9% LIHTC       Pg 5, Line 16, Change to “50%” of the annual credit ceiling    Thank you for your feedback. OHCS will
Mertz                             must go to Qualified Non-Profits “and Community Housing        consider for the next QAP update.
                                  Development Organizations (CHDO)”




Kathleen   REACH   Basis Boost    Pg 9, Line 32, add “10) Projects developed by Community        Thank you for your feedback. OHCS will
Mertz                             Housing Development Organizations (CHDO)”                      consider for the next QAP update.




Kathleen   REACH   Supplemental   Pg 16, Line 15, Add Community Housing Development              Thank you for your feedback. OHCS will
Mertz              Criteria       Organization (CHDO) to the list of supplemental criteria for   consider for the next QAP update.
                                  Organization Type.




                                                                                                                             114|Page
                                                   2025 Oregon QAP

Kathleen   REACH   Project          Pg 17, Line 11, Add Community Housing Development                  Thank you for your feedback. OHCS will
Mertz              Criteria: Risk   Organization (CHDO) as a critical priority                         consider for the next QAP update.
                   of Loss
                   Physical




Kathleen   REACH   Minimum Tax      Pg 18, Line 30, The State should not be defining the equity        Thank you for your feedback, OHCS will
Mertz              Equity Pay In    negotiations on capital contributions. The developer should        remove this from the QAP.
                   Schedule         be allowed to negotiate this in the best interest of the project
                                    and their own development. | recommend removing this
                                    section altogether. For example, a project should be able to
                                    negotiate a pay-in schedule that maximizes the equity
                                    available based on the time-value of money. For example, if
                                    my investor can squeeze out $0.005 per credit if | forgo a 65%
                                    complete equity payment, then | should be able to drive that
                                    financial bargain for my project without State intervention.
Kathleen   REACH   General          Pg 12, Line 28, Add “significant” before “change in resource       Thank you for your feedback, this section
Mertz                               needs                                                              has been edited.




                                                                                                                                    115|Page
                                                   2025 Oregon QAP

Kathleen   REACH   9% Credit      Pg 23, Line 29, This paragraph is confusing. | think it should      Thank you for your feedback, this section
Mertz              Exchange       read “If LIHTCs are exchanged, the project must continue to         has been edited.
                                  comply with the requirements applicable in the initial year of
                                  award...”    The first and last sentence of the paragraph make
                                  this confusing. It reads like if | return credits, then | need to
                                  start over with a new application, but the rest of this section
                                  speaks to the exchange process, which doesn’t require a full
                                  new application.


Kathleen   REACH   General        Pg 6, Line 23, Should “determination” be changed to                 Thank you for your feedback, OHCS does
Mertz                             “allocation” ?                                                      not believe so.




Kathleen   REACH   Preservation   Pg 18, Line 7, Change the rent burden tiebreaker criteria to        Tiebreakers have been revised to remove
Mertz              Tiebreakers    “Historic Property listed or eligible to be listed on the           rent burden.
                                  National Register”. The rent burden criteria is only solved
                                  with operating subsidy not capital subsidy so this is not a
                                  meaningful tiebreaker criteria for a capital source.
                                  Additionally, a project could have multiple existing soft debt
                                  or other lenders that could be influencing the rents charged
                                  and are therefore not in the control of the developer/sponsor
                                  to change.




                                                                                                                                   116|Page
                                                   2025 Oregon QAP

Kathleen   REACH   General          Pg 6, Line 28, When would changes be made? Is this after          This would happen after HSC but before
Mertz                               HSC but before Project Commitment (in ORCA process)?              Commitment.
                                    Reduction in Deferred Developer fee should NOT be counted
                                    against an over-subsidization calculation.




Kathleen   REACH   Conduit Bond     Annual Charge on Balance:    It is unclear what is meant by       By outstanding balance, we mean the
Mertz              Charges          outstanding balance. Is this the amount undrawn or drawn?         drawn amount.
                                    Why would a developer have to pay a large issuance charge,
                                    and an ongoing charge during construction, when it is also
                                    having to pay interest on the same amount of money through
                                    the construction lender? This appears to be double dipping
                                    on fees related to the same bond transaction. This should not
                                    be an annual fee related to outstanding balance. If this is
                                    related to an annual fee through the life of the bond, then a
                                    nominal flat fee for servicing the bond is palatable and can be
                                    more easily budgeted as a fixed fee from the operating
                                    expense.
Kathleen   REACH   ORCA   Process   Pg 13, Line 16, Recommend    HCS meet twice monthly to move       Thank you for your feedback.
Mertz                               projects through ORCA with more urgency to produce and
                                    preserve affordable housing across the state.




                                                                                                                                     117
                                                                                                                                      | Page
                                                 2025 Oregon QAP

Kathleen   REACH   Conduit Bond   Overall, the increase in bond fees, across the board, is        Thank you for your feedback.
Mertz              Charges        troubling. The annual charge on balance fee could incentivize
                                  the MTEB back-to-back bond structure, which is bad for the
                                  projects. This structure is very rigid and unfavorable to the
                                  developer/sponsor because of the inability to restructure a
                                  deal midway should a risk need to be mitigated, or if there
                                  are cost savings, or the market changes to affect operating
                                  costs, etc. The bond deals are structured 2-3 years before
                                  conversion, and so the developer needs as much flexibility as
                                  possible through this financing cycle. These cost increases
                                  from the state may have unintended consequences that
                                  ultimately make bond deals more difficult than they already
                                  are.
Kathleen   REACH   Definitions    Add defined terms. Sometimes     items are capitalized and      Thank you for your feedback.
Mertz                             sometimes not, so it is confusing as to whether there is a
                                  reference to a specific defined term.




Kathleen   REACH   General        Add an index of all cross referenced policy or guideline        Thank you for your feedback.
Mertz                             documents.   For example, some information is repeated or
                                  cross referenced in GPGM    or ORCA or other documents.
                                  Having a full list of those intersectional documents will
                                  benefit the users of the QAP.




                                                                                                                                 118
                                                                                                                                  | Page
                                                   2025 Oregon QAP

Kathleen   REACH   PIS Allocation   Pg 23, Line 37, Paying down deferred developer fee should be        | Thank you for your feedback.
Mertz              Requirements     an eligible cost that would not trigger “excess funds”. This
                                    should be clearly called out as excluded under an “excess
                                    funds” calculation.




Kathleen   REACH   Construction     Pg 26, Line 2-8, The tenor of the QAP changed at this                Thank you for your feedback.
Mertz              Closing          paragraph because it is so detailed prescriptive. This
                                    paragraph can be handled in the reservation letter or other
                                    program areas rather than in the QAP.




Kathleen   REACH   OHCS Sole        Pg 28, Line 15, Add “increased” as another option for OHCS.          Thank you for your feedback.
Mertz              Discretion




Kathleen   REACH   Financial        Pg 29, Line 8, Are there objective criteria the State is seeking     Thank you for your feedback.
Mertz              Solvency         when defining “any financial difficulty, risk or similar matter”?
                                    This section should be removed in its entirety.




                                                                                                                                         119
                                                                                                                                          | Page
                                                      2025 Oregon QAP

Stefanie   Related NW   Conduit Bond   It looks like OHCS is increasing their bond fees. This has         Some of the state HFA issuers that we
Kondor                  Charges        already been a real challenge. There is an existing problem        looked at include Washington,    DC,
(Public                                that we face locally with issuance charges being already sized     California, Rhode Island, South Dakota
Hearing)                               as large as they are, which often breaches the program             and Colorado. All of these states have
                                       investment rules on. A project that | closed last year, we had     both an issuance charge and an annual
                                       this issue on a small PSH deal where | have to have 2              ongoing charge. We do believe that the
                                       construction lenders. Oftentimes your debt and equity will         complexity of bond issuance has changed
                                       come from the same source, which is fantastic, because you         since 2019: larger issuances, more
                                       usually benefit from better cost of capital and better equity      complex structures, and increases in the
                                       pricing. And in those issues in those situations, because the      fees OHCS pays to legal/financial advisors.
                                       issuer fees are so high, we ended up having to have a second       Importantly, OHCS differs from most
                                       construction lender come in and take out before we convert         other states in that it is a one-stop shop
                                       to Perm to basically facilitate some of the bond issuer charge     for many types of funding including tax
                                       fee issues. So we went and looked at what other States are         credits, subsidies and bonds. In other
                                       doing, what Colorado, Arizona, Utah, which | feel like, are        states, sponsors apply to several
                                       very similar in population and probably deal flow. OHCS is         organizations for their funding, each with
                                       over double of any of the other States. So OHCS is bond            their own charges and processes. We
                                       charge, | think, is proposed at 1.5%. Arizona is 0 point 0 2%.     understand that there can be efficiency
                                       Utah is 0 point 7 5%. And Colorado is a half a percent. This       when the bond holder and LIHTC investor
                                       can be hundreds of thousands of dollars. There are ways to         are the same entity, and will continue to
                                       structure this where you're still getting money to OHCS for        allow related parties.
                                       transaction fees. There's ways to do this work with your bond
                                       council. There's several States that have surmounted this
                                       issue. But Oregon still has not evolved from this issuer charge
                                       and now it's exacerbated by increasing the fee. So | really
                                       really encourage you to look at this because it's going to
                                       again. This impacts your equity that's in the deal. You may be
                                       leaving money on the table because there are investors and
                                       lenders that can't do the deal, or you're having to charge
                                       additional origination fees because you're having to work
                                       with 2 construction lenders, and it just makes it cumbersome.
                                       You have to go through this whole takeout. It's like a whole
                                       second, you know. It's not as arduous as a closing but there's
                                       still, you know, a lot of things to do there and it's risk,
                                       because it's another actionable item. So | really encourage to
                                       look at that in and of itself, and to increase it just is really
                                       going to be problematic.



                                                                                                                                         120|Page
                                                        2025 Oregon QAP

Nate Grein   Related NW   Conduit Bond   We’re writing to express concern about the update to the           Our proposal follows all IRS limits, and
                          Charge         proposed conduit bond charges. There are collateral damages        has been vetted and approved by our
                                         associated with such a change, which can significantly             financial advisors.   The proposed charges
                                         increase costs on a PAB funded project. Most importantly,          are under what the agency is legally
                                         this change magnifies the existing problem developers face         allowed to charge in terms of “full
                                         locally with issuance charges being sized as large as they are,    spread” from what the IRS allows under
                                         which often breaches program investment rules. This often          current tax law. For certain structures like
                                         times will disallow a debt provider to also provide equity to a    short-term draws, related parties and re-
                                         project. It is common that a direct lender/investor will           issuances, we will work with our advisors
                                         propose on a project and price competitive discounts to both       (bond counsel, financial advisors, our
                                         equity pricing and on debt pricing based on using the same         internal debt management team) to get
                                         provider for both. This discount can be significant, ultimately    as close to the present value of this
                                         lowering the amount of public subsidy a project may need to        charge as possible, which might require
                                         become feasible. We come across the program investment             different calculations. We understand
                                         problem issue on many current projects, and by increasing          that there can be efficiency when the
                                         the issuance charge, it only makes it worse. This will decrease    bond holder and LIHTC investor are the
                                         the competitive market for transactions, ultimately impacting      same entity, and will continue to allow
                                         our entire development/funder community. If fees in fact do        related parties.
                                         need to increase as significantly as this proposal indicates,
                                         perhaps it should be spread out among the other offerings,
                                         and not piled solely on the conduit bond program. As an
                                         example, METRO will typically make an award, and then add
                                         to the award the amount of their fee. Maybe this could be
                                         instituted in lieu of increasing bond charges, which will hurt
                                         debt and equity pricing.
Nate Grein   Related NW   ORCA 2 Deal    The two deal cap per ORCA section is, in our view, extremely       This limitation has been in place since the
                          Cap            concerning. The proposed limitation will have long term            launch of the ORCA and will continue to
                                         ramifications to each and every firm operating in this             remain in place. This incentivizes
                                         industry, to their pipeline and to their business. It will shape   sponsors to move projects more quickly
                                         who we are able to work with on a partnership level and will       through the process by prioritizing those
                                         inform the scale at which we are able to operate.                  that are most ready to proceed, and also
                                                                                                            keeps individual sponsors from stacking
                                                                                                            projects in the waitlist to the detriment of
                                                                                                            other sponsors.




                                                                                                                                           121 |
                                                         2025 Oregon QAP

Nate Grein   Related NW   CSO Set Aside   Another consideration on this subject is that the set aside is     The point of the set aside for CSOs and
                                          outsized relative to demand. Early indications from 2024           rural nonprofit development is to hold
                                          ORCA data suggests that the Rural NP and CSO set aside is          resources for those organizations that
                                          undersubscribed. Rather than delay the allocation of needed        may take longer to get to the readiness
                                          resources through end of year recycling, would it not be more      standard expected of projects in the
                                          productive to right size this set aside and provide additional     ORCA pipeline. It is not surprising that
                                          funds to oversubscribed set asides.                                this is not the first set aside to be fully
                                                                                                             subscribed, and in fact reflects the intent.



Nate Grein   Related NW   CSO Set Aside   Perhaps it would be instructive to look to Washington’s tax        Thank you for your feedback. Washington
                                          credit allocation process to mitigate some of these identified     is a different state and has different
                                          issues.   WSHFCs   policies promote an array of opportunities to   priorities and processes and realities that
                                          reach the State’s strategic housing initiatives through a          do not apply to Oregon. OHCS prioritizes
                                          scoring system that allows the developer to put forth the best     CSOs in a multitude of ways and will
                                          and most feasible project.   This creates multiple avenues for     continue to do so and engage with CSOs
                                          partnerships with CSO’s whereby smaller CSOs can gradually         on the best ways to do so.
                                          increase their participation in affordable housing- building
                                          capacity and experience through partnering. Typically, at
                                          project inception, a smaller CSO comes on as a service
                                          provider, and then builds acumen to become an MGP, with
                                          an interest sized to their commensurate    participation in risk
                                          and workload. As the CSO increases their participation, staff
                                          and expertise to drive development as the majority
                                          owner/developer then their ownership stake should increase.
                                          Unfortunately, in Oregon, by limiting the participation to 40%
                                          dev fee or 51% ownership, OHCS is eliminating many small up
                                          and coming CSO from participating in affordable housing- this
                                          is not equitable. You will ultimately be favoring a small few
                                          larger, sophisticated CSOs.




                                                                                                                                             122 |Page
                                                         2025 Oregon QAP

Nate Grein   Related NW   ORCA Waitlist   The proposed approach to managing the ORCA waitlist—               Thank you for your feedback. OHCS staff
                                          effectively timing of OHCS’ receipt of a ‘complete’ Impact         refer to multiple objective rubrics and
                                          Assessment—puts an incredible amount of power with OHCS.           guidelines when assessing projects that
                                          While we appreciate OHCS’ commitment to adhering to                have been submitted through the ORCA
                                          objective standards, there are two key problems with this          with the purpose of avoiding subjectivity
                                          approach. First, because the same reviewer can’t possibly          in evaluations.
                                          review every submission, there will be considerable variability
                                          in project reviews and the issues that OHCS requires to be
                                          cured. Two identical projects, for example, may land on
                                          drastically different places on the waitlist, strictly because a
                                          project detail that caught one reviewer's eye, didn’t catch
                                          another’s. The result is a lack of consistency and a lack of
                                          objectivity. Second, we do not believe that the requirements
                                          for the Impact Assessment are rigorous enough to properly
                                          vet the overall quality of a project. Deals with limited equity
                                          impact and sponsors with ongoing development/operational
                                          challenges will have full access to limited and precious
                                          resources. Given the breadth and severity of the housing
                                          crisis, this lack of prioritization feels problematic.




                                                                                                                                          123 |Page
                                                         2025 Oregon QAP

Nate Grein   Related NW   Developer vs.   Because development consultants are not limited by the two          Thank you for your feedback. OHCS is
                          Consultant      deal cap per ORCA section, the proposed framework benefits          continuing to engage with partners on
                                          consultants, while disadvantaging true co-developers, such as       the role of consultants and how that
                                          turnkey partners. Turnkey developers are vital to affordable        should be accounted for in our evaluation
                                          housing production—by lending their expertise to smaller            of development teams and their capacity.
                                          non-profits, as well as their capacity to act as financial
                                          guarantors, turnkey developers can create bespoke
                                          communities for their partners while minimizing that
                                          partner’s financial exposure. Under the proposed ORCA
                                          framework, development consultants—who take on none of
                                          a transactions’ financial guarantees—are heavily favored,
                                          thereby deterring partnership opportunities and misallocating
                                          risk onto smaller owners. We believe that OHCS should
                                          establish clear guidelines about exceptions to the two deal
                                          cap. Given this specific concern, OHCS should clarify that
                                          projects developed on a turnkey basis will not be applicable
                                          to the project cap of the co-owner providing development
                                          services. This will decrease risk for smaller organizations,
                                          leverage the strength of existing development groups, and
                                          provide new and smaller organizations the opportunity to be
                                          in an ownership role. Development is a risky endeavor and
                                          the financial risks can be destabilizing; especially for smaller
                                          organizations. Turnkey development supports these
                                          organizations to expand their reach while avoiding
                                          unnecessary risk. Conversely, removing this cap will decrease
                                          risk for smaller organizations, leverage the strength of
                                          existing development groups, and provide new and smaller
                                          organizations the opportunity to be in an ownership role.
                                          Development is a risky endeavor and the financial risks can be
                                          destabilizing; especially for smaller organizations. Turnkey
                                          development supports these organizations to expand their
                                          reach while avoiding unnecessary risk. Note, Related’s
                                          turnkey projects have us in the deal (as AGP/co-owner)      until
                                          8609 as we provide full guaranties and cover the lion’s share
                                          of the predevelopment on their behalf. We should not be
                                          penalized for participating in the deal in a way that protects
                                          the non-profit’s interest. Turnkey development, where the
                                          developer exits at 8609 and CSO takes full ownership should


                                                                                                                                           124|Page
              2025 Oregon QAP

count not towards the turnkey developer in the “two count”
but for the final owner, the CSO “culturally specific
organization”.




                                                             125|Page
                                                          2025 Oregon QAP

Nate Grein   Related NW   CSO Set Aside   Under the proposed QAP and ORCA allocation framework, all           OHCS has an array of capacity building
                                          CSOs developing affordable housing are effectively equal in         and predevelopment options that
                                          their business acumen, capacity, and solvency. We know, of          support CSOs that are emerging. We
                                          course, that this is not the case. Our state contains a broad       encourage collaboration, but require
                                          spectrum of CSOs, from new and emerging non-profit                  genuine collaboration backed by
                                          organizations to established organizations that have been           resources.
                                          serving diverse communities for decades. The 25% set aside
                                          as proposed would significantly favor the latter, while
                                          creating concerning barriers for the former to build capacity
                                          through partnerships. Disincentivizing collaboration within
                                          the industry at this point in time feels converse to OHCS’
                                          mission
Nate Grein   Related NW   General         We appreciate that ORCA embodies a tremendous amount of             Thank you for your feedback. OHCS
                                          collective effort and we have seen firsthand OHCS’ deep             recognizes how important it is to remain
                                          commitment to improving resource allocation processes at            transparent with our partners and we
                                          the state. With any large-scale system overhaul, there will of      appreciate your patience as we navigate
                                          course be changes, unknowns, and new challenges. On this            this new process together.
                                          subject, we think one area that has been relatively
                                          underdiscussed in the QAP/ORCA feedback to date pertains
                                          to predictability. In our industry, as you all know,
                                          predictability of dates and processes is critical. The regularity
                                          of NOFA rounds and allocation cycles led to a natural
                                          development sequence that was navigable and structured.
                                          Regularity for developers breeds confidence, which then
                                          translates into deal making and production. Our fear is that
                                          the development community’s justified concern about
                                          waitlist management and a lack of predictability will
                                          jeopardize the overall pipeline across the state. With so much
                                          unknown about the next few years and a higher perception of
                                          risk, developers are cautious to move deals forward. With this
                                          in mind, what we ask is that OHCS retains its commitment to
                                          transparency, communication, and engagement. Without
                                          clear instructions, accurate information about the availability
                                          of resources, and adequate notice about upcoming changes,
                                          the months ahead will be very challenging for all
                                          stakeholders.




                                                                                                                                           126 |
                                                         2025 Oregon QAP

Nate Grein   Related NW   ORCA 2 Deal     We believe that OHCS should seriously reconsider this policy.     Thank you for your feedback. This policy
                          Cap             Our suggestion is to remove the cap altogether. Sponsors          encourages more project sponsors to
                                          should be empowered to bring all viable projects to the           enter the pool by not monopolizing the
                                          agency. All deals that are able to proceed through ORCA’s         resources to a small pool of developers.
                                          clear and objective standards should be encouraged to do so,
                                          regardless of the project sponsor. We need to embolden the
                                          development community, not create new policy barriers that
                                          will stymie production.


Nate Grein   Related NW   ORCA 2 Deal     Developers may take on larger and larger projects as they try     This policy keeps larger developers from
                          Cap             and maximize production under the two project cap. The            putting so many projects into the pipeline
                                          number of smaller, infill projects may suffer, which may, in      that smaller developers do not have an
                                          turn, negatively impact smaller scale developers unable to        opportunity to receive funding.
                                          provide guarantees for larger developments.




Nate Grein   Related NW   CSO Set Aside   We understand that OHCS has sought to address this precise        OHCS assumes that prioritizing CSOs does
                                          issue through two qualifiers for CSO partnerships—that 50%        not deprioritize production but instead
                                          of the partnership is owned by a CSO or that the organization     that building capacity increases the
                                          receives 40% of developer fee. Again, we appreciate OHCS’         opportunities for production.
                                          intent with this proposed policy, but this proposal will create
                                          a significant discrepancy between   risk and reward within the
                                          partnership. The non-CSO partner would take on all
                                          guarantees for the project (as has historically occurred) but
                                          would see massively reduced returns. Our question to OHCS
                                          is this—is the agency’s imperative to build capacity for CSOs
                                          or to produce affordable housing? If its primary objective is
                                          the expeditious delivery of housing, than this policy is out of
                                          alignment with the mission.




                                                                                                                                            127 |
                                                       2025 Oregon QAP

Nate Grein   Related NW   ORCA 2 Deal   Due to ORCA, developers with no affordable housing                OHCS is committed to helping emerging
                          Cap           experience have a clear path to an award. On one hand, this       developers and has created a team of
                                        will diversify the industry. On the other, production rates may   Technical Advisors to assist development
                                        suffer as inexperienced developers work through their first       teams throughout the process.
                                        affordable housing developments. What’s more, OHCS’s Asset
                                        Management    division will be strained as the number of
                                        developers requesting state resources balloons.




Nate Grein   Related NW   ORCA 2 Deal   Lastly, we are deeply concerned about overall efficiency. Let’s   The ORCA was designed to be more
                          Cap           say, for example, a developer has three viable projects ready     efficient for the financing of affordable
                                        to develop. Due to the cap, the developer submits the two         housing generally.
                                        projects that it believes are most feasible. One project is
                                        funded and moves into Financial Eligibility, while the second
                                        remains in Impact Assessment Review due to
                                        oversubscription of a certain set aside. The third unsubmitted
                                        project remains in Intake, though, as it turns out, it would
                                        have been funded due to set aside availability. In order to
                                        move this third project through Impact Assessment, the
                                        developer is forced to remove the second project from the
                                        waitlist, further delaying its delivery. While this is just a
                                        hypothetical, it does highlight negative spillover effects of
                                        capping the number of deals developers can bring to OHCS.
Nate Grein   Related NW   ORCA 2 Deal   Moreover, relevant sponsors should have the ability to self-      OHCS allows projects to form their
                          Cap           select the lead sponsor relative to the two project cap. This     development teams however they desire.
                                        will yield much needed flexibility and encourage partnerships
                                        within the development community. As OHCS knows,
                                        partnership is the bedrock of affordable housing
                                        production—creating new barriers to collaboration is
                                        converse to the agency’s mission.




                                                                                                                                         128 |Page
                                                        2025 Oregon QAP

Nate Grein   Related NW   80% AMI in     LIFT currently only allows for funding to 60% AMI or less.          This would require a statutory change to
                          LIFT           However,   LIHTC allows units to be up to 80% AMI with an           the LIFT program (ORS 458.480).
                                         income averaging 60% AMI on a blended basis.        This means in
                                         a LIHTC deal you would offset the 80% AMI with 30% -50%
                                         units to get your deal to be 60% on a blended basis.     LIFT
                                         needs to align with LIHTC better as this will serve a greater
                                         span of incomes, would create more proceeds offsetting the
                                         subsidy needs and bring another tool to address housing
                                         needs in a community. When OHCS was asked if they would
                                         be amending LIFT policy for 80% AMIs, the agency said no; we
                                         are hoping someone can figure out a work around- this
                                         answer is concerning and inefficient.
Stefanie     Related NW   LIFT 80% AMI   In prior conversations, it's not in the QAP but | feel like we      This would require a statutory change to
Kondor                    Restrictions   really should address the fact that LIFT can't be used for 80%      the LIFT program (ORS 458.480).
(Public                                  AMI units. | say this because, you know, income averaging
Hearing)                                 with section 42 does allow for 80%. And you should be
                                         putting force subsidy. If you really are saying that resources
                                         are finite. This is a really great place for bang for your buck.
                                         So by aligning that 80%, all you're saying is that on a blended
                                         basis, your units have to be at 60% or less right? But you can
                                         go up to 80%. And what that does is it allows for you, having
                                         deeper affordable units and some middle income housing.
                                         And what on a blended basis, you're at 60%. So to offset
                                         those 80%, you're putting in some 30% units, some 40% units.
                                         And that can really be a fantastic way to deliver a broader
                                         spectrum of income and also work on income averaging. So
                                         it's just matching the funding up. So that's one | would
                                         advocate for.




                                                                                                                                          129 |Page
                                                          2025 Oregon QAP

Nate Grein   Related NW   Equity Pay in    While it is advantageous to have front loaded pay-in                 Thank you for your feedback, OHCS will
                          Schedule         schedule, investors are not always willing to meet these             remove this from the QAP.
                                           thresholds, and sometimes lower other paired debt pricing.
                                           OHCS needs to stay out of dictating the investors deal, each
                                           deal is unique and, by mandating this criteria, you may be
                                           reducing the number of investors that will participate in a
                                           deal. Also, not only will these pay-in requirements negatively
                                           impact pricing, but often times a developer can’t even use
                                           that level of equity early on because of the 50% test. This is
                                           not a well thought out provision. We highly recommend you
                                           speak with an investor about this, | imagine they would share
                                           this sentiment and more.
Stefanie     Related NW   Minimum    Tax   Pg 18, We have not historically seen anything like this before.      Thank you for your feedback, OHCS will
Kondor                    Equity Pay in    It's saying that, given the scarcity of state and local resources    remove this from the QAP.
(Public                   Schedule         leverageable for the development of affordable rental
Hearing)                                   housing and extreme tight margins in the project
                                           development, OHCS is requiring minimum tax credit equity
                                           contribution benchmarks. So you're asking for 5% at close.
                                           You're asking for 20% at 65% at or before 65% project
                                           completion and then another 65% installment at a hundred
                                           percent completion and then the remainder at before 8609
                                           issuance. So | think, just from my perspective, what I've seen
                                           that every deal is very unique. Every deal is going to have to
                                           negotiate that with their investor. You're going to see with
                                           this stringent of a criteria, a reduction in pricing. So you know,
                                           you may want to get your equity in the front end because you
                                           think that that's going to reduce the ask of lift. But it doesn't
                                           actually work that way because most of the time that equity
                                           you can't even touch because you have to get through your
                                           50% test. So | would really really encourage you to pull that
                                           out. Talk to an investor or 2, because it's not going to work.




                                                                                                                                            130|Page
                                                       2025 Oregon QAP

Erika       Rural         Mandatory     Pg 15, Line 10, The examples listed work in urban areas but          There have a been a number of successful
Holzhauer   Community     Criteria      not in rural areas, supportive services are sparse or lacking        projects in rural Oregon to go through
            Assistance                  entirely, ECE facilities aren’t a viable option, transportation      OHCS's PSH Institute and house
            Corporation                 opportunities are missing in many places.      Pine Acres, being a   chronically homeless individuals and
                                        rehab, cannot choose its site location, and services in this         families. OHCS has also recently
                                        small town are sparse. Many projects are left to try and             conducted a study showing the urgent
                                        incorporate universal design to meet this criterion. Universal       need for more childcare facilities in rural
                                        design is not uniformly defined and, on an acquisition/ rehab        Oregon and there are examples of models
                                        may not always be the best use of funds if there are other           that will work in those communities, as
                                        Fire Life Safety issues that are more urgent                         well as case studies, within that study
                                                                                                             that is also on our website.
                                                                                                             Transportation opportunities are not
                                                                                                             included as a specific criteria anywhere
                                                                                                             within the QAP, and in the ORCA there is
                                                                                                             differentiated criteria for rural to address
                                                                                                             the different ways transportation access
                                                                                                             manifests in those communities.
                                                                                                             Universal design is not   a mandatory
                                                                                                             criteria but will be more defined in final
                                                                                                             draft. Preservation projects are not going
                                                                                                             to use the same criteria as new
                                                                                                             construction projects - please see
                                                                                                             Preservation Projects subsection of the
                                                                                                             Project Selection Process section of the
                                                                                                             QAP draft.
Erika       Rural         Tiebreakers   Tie Breaker A Policy enriched: i. PSH is not viable in most rural    There have a been a number of successful
Holzhauer   Community                   places, neither is the co-located ECE facility leaving again         projects in rural Oregon to go through
            Assistance                  universal design which may not be appropriate on an                  OHCS's PSH Institute and house
            Corporation                 acquisition/ rehab                                                   chronically homeless individuals and
                                                                                                             families. OHCS has also recently
                                                                                                             conducted a study showing the urgent
                                                                                                             need for more childcare facilities in rural
                                                                                                             Oregon and there are examples of models
                                                                                                             that will work in those communities, as
                                                                                                             well as case studies, within that study
                                                                                                             that is also on our website.




                                                                                                                                            131 |
                                                        2025 Oregon QAP

Erika       Rural         Supplemental   Pg 15, Line 30, Rural communities cannot easily meet this: 1.      OHCS has also recently conducted a study
Holzhauer   Community     Criteria       This is not a viable model in a rural environment with a small     showing the urgent need for more
            Assistance                   project, 2. Most rural families rely on in-home care and not a     childcare facilities in rural Oregon and
            Corporation                  childcare facility, 3. Much more difficult on an                   there are examples of models that will
                                         acquisition/rehab                                                  work in those communities, as well as
                                                                                                            case studies, within that study that is also
                                                                                                            on our website. We will more specifically
                                                                                                            define what qualifies as an ECE facility.
                                                                                                            Preservation projects are not going to use
                                                                                                            the same criteria as new construction
                                                                                                            projects - please see Preservation
                                                                                                            Projects subsection of the Project
                                                                                                            Selection Process section of the QAP
                                                                                                            draft.
Erika       Rural         Supplemental   Pg 15, Line 32, Again, the co-located ECE facility is not viable   This criterion is meant to be specific to
Holzhauer   Community     Criteria       and economic development in the rural communities is much          the community the project will be in, and
            Assistance                   different than in urban areas. Access to transit may be non-       the examples provided are not an all-
            Corporation                  existent, workforce training sites and colleges are minimal        inclusive list. If there are other ways in
                                         with some communities not having any access to these               which the community will benefit
                                         facilities. Yet people live there and still need affordable        economically from housing tenants here,
                                         housing, despite the lack of services available in the             which many rural communities have
                                         communities.                                                       advocated to OHCS is a major reason for
                                                                                                            the need for affordable housing in their
                                                                                                            cities, that would count here.
Erika       Rural         Mandatory      Pg 15, Line 17, This requirement should be eliminated. It is an    Small cities (under 10,000 population)
Holzhauer   Community     Criteria       unfunded mandate that many rural towns will find difficult to      that are exempt from OHNA
            Assistance                   meet because they lack the capacity to complete the OHNA           requirements are also exempt from this
            Corporation                  on their own and lack the financial means to obtain the            requirement, as stated in the QAP draft.
                                         technical assistance needed. The timing of the deadlines for       For cities of 10,000 population or greater,
                                         completing the OHNA varies by city and does not foot with          the option exists to align with a city's
                                         the timing in the OHCS application. Many of the cities aren’t      Housing Production Strategy if it has not
                                         required to have an OHNA for several years. Please remove          updated it since the new OHNA
                                         this requirement; it will prevent projects in rural towns from     requirements were enacted.
                                         applying.




                                                                                                                                             132 |
                                                          2025 Oregon QAP

Erika       Rural         Subsidy Limits   Clarify whether subsidy limits listed in the ORCA manual apply      The updated ORCA will have different gap
Holzhauer   Community                      to the QAP and tax credit distribution as well.                     subsidy limits for non-LIHTC and LIHTC
            Assistance                                                                                         projects. LIHTC gap subsidy limits must be
            Corporation                                                                                        used for any gap financing, these subsidy
                                                                                                               limits have been published and presented
                                                                                                               at Housing Stability Council and included
                                                                                                               the LIHTC frameworks on the OHCS
                                                                                                               website.

Erika       Rural         Rural            The current OHCS QAP is likely to result in inequitable             The ORCA has a funding set aside
Holzhauer   Community     inequities       distribution of funds to rural communities because the              available to culturally specific
            Assistance                     project criteria and tie breakers are easier to meet by urban       organizations and nonprofits developing
            Corporation                    projects than rural areas. Furthermore, in several places the       in rural areas. This setaside is intended to
                                           QAP references comparisons between projects for efficiency          address the issues that are cited in this
                                           and other qualities yet there is no indication that like projects   comment as gap funding for LIHTC
                                           will be compared with like. Urban and Rural should not be           projects can be accessed by eligible
                                           compared with each other; rather urban projects should be           organizations.
                                           compared against urban and rural against rural for all metrics
                                           (within urban and rural there can be categories for type of
                                           project such as low rise, high rise, acquisition rehab, etc.). |
                                           strongly urge OHCS to categorize their comparisons so that
                                           urban and rural areas are not competing against each other
                                           and projects can be compared with similar project types in
                                           terms of geography, building & construction type. Rural
                                           projects struggle with many of the criteria used in project
                                           standards and tie breakers.
Erika       Rural         Preservation     Pg 17, Line 16, Risk of Loss Federal PBRA: PBRA is at risk          The full definition of our priorities for this
Holzhauer   Community                      within two years of application: considering it is likely that      preservation category includes projects
            Assistance                     rural projects will be on a wait list for funding given the         expiring within the next seven years. For
            Corporation                    current criteria it seems like 2 years from date of application     the preservation projects in this LIHTC
                                           may be too soon of an expiration maybe use the 2 years as a         round we are focusing on the critical
                                           tiebreaker so more urgent projects with PBRA loss are               priority of projects at imminent risk of
                                           prioritized. Use 3-5 years, the time it takes to fund and           loss.
                                           construct a project as the cut off for PBRA in this criterion.




                                                                                                                                               133 |
                                                        2025 Oregon QAP

Erika       Rural         Preservation   Pg 18, Line 8, Projects requesting lower subsidy per unit and       The full definition of our priorities for this
Holzhauer   Community     Tiebreakers    4) projects with the lowest AMI rent restrictions- Leans            preservation category includes projects
            Assistance                   towards urban as again the leverage (read additional                expiring within the next seven years. For
            Corporation                  resources) needed to get the project to allow for lowest AMI        the preservation projects in this LIHTC
                                         rent restrictions isn’t available in rural areas like they are in   round we are focusing on the critical
                                         urban areas.                                                        priority of projects at imminent risk of
                                                                                                             loss.




                                                                                                                                             134|Page
                                                           2025 Oregon QAP

Erika       Rural         Preservation   The Pine Acres project will not be a critical priority            The full definition of our priorities for this
Holzhauer   Community                    preservation project because the lead developer is nota CSO,      preservation category includes projects
            Assistance                   and it falls into the category of Risk of Loss Physical or        owned by a CRO as "High Priority" where
            Corporation                  Financial Challenges. The project is owned by a CRO, a            they're at risk of loss and at least a third
                                         community-based nonprofit which reflects the overall              of the tenant households are considered
                                         community and is less diverse than the CSO requirements.          vulnerable.
                                         This means it will likely be on a wait list behind other urban
                                         projects. The composition of rural areas in Oregon does not
                                         always meet the requirement of being a “community of
                                         color” however, the areas are considered underserved, and
                                         many meet multiple CJEST criteria. There are only a few
                                         CSO’s in rural Oregon and some lack the capacity to
                                         undertake a housing project. | call this to your attention
                                         because in the LIHTC criteria (Page 16 Line 15) your intention
                                         to serve rural areas is noted when the supplemental criteria
                                         number 8      lists being a CSO or rural nonprofit, it is
                                         recommended that this criterion be added to Risk of Loss
                                         Physical or Financial Challenges to allow rural projects to
                                         compete. Additionally, OHCS’ requirement that the CSO lead
                                         the project at 51% Partnership interest would prevent a lower
                                         capacity CSO from being able to lead a project when
                                         supported by an organization like RCAC. When we partner
                                         with someone and our guarantees are on the line, we require
                                         51% ownership so we can make a protective decision if need
                                         be. We are nonprofit, and our interest is in seeing the partner
                                         nonprofit build its capacity and retain ownership of the
                                         project.   Perhaps allow CSO’s to have partners that can add
                                         to their capacity while still allowing the CSO to qualify as
                                         leading a project based on who plans to operate the project,
                                         who owns it at the end of the tax credit period and how
                                         decisions are made. We typically have a 51/49 split when our
                                         guarantees are on the line, with developer fee negotiated
                                         separately.




                                                                                                                                           135|Page
                                                        2025 Oregon QAP

Erika       Rural         Preservation   Pg 17, Line 8, Risk of loss physical or financial challenge:        The full definition of our priorities for this
Holzhauer   Community                    Applicant is a CSO- please include or a rural non-profit            preservation category includes projects
            Assistance                                                                                       owned by a CRO as "High Priority" where
            Corporation                                                                                      they're at risk of loss and at least a third
                                                                                                             of the tenant households are considered
                                                                                                             vulnerable.




Erika       Rural         Supplemental   Pg 15, Line 28, Rural projects have less resources to leverage,     OHCS provides higher subsidy limits in
Holzhauer   Community     Criteria       there are fewer funding sources available to rural projects,        rural areas, and a sliding scale of higher
            Assistance                   there are fewer private foundations and grant sources.              subsidy limits per unit for lower AMI
            Corporation                  Therefore, being able to make a project average an AMI of           levels. Supporting the most vulnerable
                                         50% or less is more difficult than in an urban environment          Oregonians is a priority of the agency.
                                         because the capital stack may be different and access to
                                         Project Based Rental Assistance may not be available. This
                                         requirement means that either the project has PBRA or 30%
                                         /40% units without PBRA (Dangerous to the project) to bring
                                         down your AMI.
Erika       Rural         Definitions    Add definitions to the document. Include: a. Material Change        OHCS has definitions in the ORCA for
Holzhauer   Community                    (there are several lists of what a material change is, and they     material change and rural, which will also
            Assistance                   differ from each other, consolidate into one list and use it        be applicable for LIHTC projects.
            Corporation                  consistently throughout the document), b. A consistent              Technical terms in the document that
                                         working definition of rural, c. Define the technical terms in       need further definition will be clarified.
                                         the document: such as vulnerable tenants, Universal design,
                                         and ECE facility (what constitutes an ECE Facility) and all other
                                         OHCS defined or capitalized terms in the document.




                                                                                                                                             136 |
                                                          2025 Oregon QAP

Erika       Rural           Tiebreakers    Tie Breaker B PJ funding— Many rural areas don’t have this       OHCS is aware of this and also wants to
Holzhauer   Community                      available but are in the OHCS allocation for balance of state.   ensure limited Federal resources that the
            Assistance                                                                                      state will lose if it does not take
            Corporation                                                                                     advantage of are able to be utilized.




Erika       Rural           Preservation   Rural projects could be a preservation tie breaker.              The first tiebreaker is projects with
Holzhauer   Community       Tiebreakers                                                                     federal project-based rent assistance,
            Assistance                                                                                      which we expect to be primarily RD-
            Corporation                                                                                     funded projects at risk of loss.




Erika       Rural           Rural          Leverage requirements for projects that don’t separate out       OHCS does not have any requirements for
Holzhauer   Community     — inequities     rural will inevitably provide urban projects an advantage as     leverage and provides increased subsidy
            Assistance                     many more resources are available in urban areas.                limits for projects in rural areas.
            Corporation




                                                                                                                                            137|Page
                                                        2025 Oregon QAP

Erika       Rural         Supplemental   Pg 16, Line 10, Clarify whether a project qualifies if it uses    As long as it also meets the Core-
Holzhauer   Community     Criteria       another sustainability standard that exceeds OHCS’ standard?      Development Manual's requirements of
            Assistance                                                                                     OHCS, this is fine.
            Corporation




Erika       Rural         Preservation   Pg 17, Line 28-30, Either 50% of units are <= 50% AMI or have     All rural projects at risk of conversion to
Holzhauer   Community                    PBRA attached, or 25% or more of the units are <=30% AMI or       market are defined as a "Critical" priority.
            Assistance                   have PBRA attached. Many rural projects do not have PBRA
            Corporation                  and under this criterion they would not qualify. This does not
                                         support those rural nonprofits that have been maintaining
                                         affordable housing in their communities in good faith that
                                         they could recapitalize their projects at some point in the
                                         future. Rather it penalizes them for trying to maintain the
                                         properties by not providing a pathway for repositioning.

Erika       Rural         Programmatic   Pg 18, Line 30, Minimum Tax Equity Pay-In Schedule: This will     Thank you for your feedback, OHCS will
Holzhauer   Community     Requirements   reduce the amount of equity the tax credits bring in because      remove this from the QAP.
            Assistance                   of asking for 65% of equity at project completion when many
            Corporation                  people bridge this equity with a loan to get the higher pricing
                                         on the credits; the further out the pay in the more cents per
                                         dollar of credit. This will impact rural projects: their
                                         resources are slim, and they need every extra cent they can
                                         get on their tax credits because rural areas already get lower
                                         pay-in rates than urban areas. Secondly, this pay in schedule
                                         may not be what the project needs. If the point is to make
                                         sure there is sufficient developer fee to cover any cost
                                         overruns by virtue of the pay-in schedule, then | suggest
                                         making those requirements known in a development services
                                         agreement template that can be vetted by the developers
                                         and the investors. In general, the negotiations that maximize
                                         the capital stack should be left to project owners and
                                         investors to determine the best solution for their project
                                         given the structure and each party’s needs.


                                                                                                                                          138 |
                                                       2025 Oregon QAP

Erika       Rural         Tiebreakers   lt would be useful to base tiebreakers on other criteria that       Thank you for your feedback
Holzhauer   Community                   better reflect the populations we are trying to serve,
            Assistance                  including lowest AMI tenants, and tenant vulnerability, and
            Corporation                 that don’t penalize rural projects just by virtue of their
                                        location and the lack of services available in rural towns.
                                        People with low incomes in the rural US deserve affordable
                                        housing too and eliminating their projects because they don’t
                                        look like urban projects is not helpful. Tiebreakers a and b
                                        eliminate or make it nearly impossible for rural projects to
                                        compete and tiebreaker c leans towards urban.
Erika       Rural         Tiebreakers   Tie Breaker C Efficient Unit production: i. Rural places don’t      Thank you for your feedback
Holzhauer   Community                   compete as well on the basis of efficient unit production
            Assistance                  because contractor costs are frequently higher, housing for
            Corporation                 contractors on remote locations is an extra expense.
                                        Efficiency is based on tax credit usage which means to be
                                        efficient you must leverage other sources to reduce the tax
                                        credit usage, this just isn’t possible in rural communities,
                                        there aren’t other sources. Further, the metric is geared
                                        toward one-bedrooms and studios as they will be most
                                        efficient in unit production and the housing need in rural
                                        communities is frequently family housing not necessarily
                                        singles. It is in everyone’s best interest to compare projects to
                                        like projects, rural family to rural family, urban singles to
                                        urban singles.
Erika       Rural         Tiebreakers   Tie breaker d. Lowest Average HH AMI Served: This leans             Thank you for your feedback
Holzhauer   Community                   towards urban because it requires additional leverage to
            Assistance                  meet.
            Corporation




                                                                                                                                          139 |Page
                                                        2025 Oregon QAP

Erika       Rural         Tiebreakers    Recommend a rural nonprofit being a tie breaker here too           Thank you for your feedback
Holzhauer   Community                    since the majority are urban oriented.
            Assistance
            Corporation




Erika       Rural         Preservation   Pg 17, Line 25, Risk of loss expiration and conversion to          Thank you for your feedback
Holzhauer   Community                    market: The property is rural — Thank you for this
            Assistance
            Corporation




Erika       Rural         Preservation   Pg 18, Line 5, Projects meeting critical priority in the Federal   Thank you for your feedback
Holzhauer   Community     Tiebreakers    PBRA Category — The timing of the PBRA expiration should be
            Assistance                   2 years or less here, but in category Risk of Loss PBRA should
            Corporation                  be 3-5 years to allow time for waitlist.




                                                                                                                                          140 |Page
                                                       2025 Oregon QAP

Pooja Dalal   Self        Tiebreakers   Total credits per units — Is unit size being considered?             OHCS's subsidy limits are scaled to
              Enhanceme                 Hypothetically, a building, can fit either ten 3-bed units or        bedroom sizes, which gives significantly
              nt Inc.                   thirty-1bed units. 30 - 1 bed units will use less tax credits than   more funding to projects with more
                                        the 10 — 3-bed units, hence tax credits per unit used will be        bedrooms. The overall limit on available
                                        less in the 30. So is OHCS saying that they will prioritize 1        gap financing along with this tiebreaker
                                        bedroom units over family sized units?                               calculating on a per unit basis attempts to
                                                                                                             not disincentivize smaller unit sizes if they
                                                                                                             make sense for the project and
                                                                                                             community.

Pooja Dalal   Self        Mandatory     Does the project need to have all of its units on a local            Public Housing Authorities can provide a
              Enhanceme   Criteria      authority waitlist? What are the eligible local authorities?         letter committing to marketing the units.
              nt Inc.                   What sort of documentation is required? Has it been                  It will not negatively impact Affirmatively
                                        considered how Culturally Specific Organizations who are also        Furthering Fair Housing marketing
                                        Lead Developers will be impacted by this rule? They would            practices or other similar types of
                                        have to place a waitlist above the needs of their specific           recruitment. This is one of the required
                                        communities they serve and whom they are building for.               selection criteria from Code.




Pooja Dalal   Self        Mandatory     It is not clearly defined how the project needs to be aligned        This will be a 1 to 2 sentence narrative
              Enhanceme   Criteria      with OHNA. Can a link to the OHNA be sent and what part of           demonstrating understanding of the
              nt Inc.                   the OHNA the project needs to align with?                            jurisdiction's needs, whether unit income
                                                                                                             levels or defined populations, as
                                                                                                             described in OHNA data or Housing
                                                                                                             Production Strategy (HPS), if available.




                                                                                                                                             141| Page
                                                        2025 Oregon QAP

Pooja Dalal   Self        Supplemental   | How many accessible units beyond the code minimum? Willa      | One or more units beyond code
              Enhanceme   Criteria        project providing 5 more than code be prioritized over a        minimum.   No, a project providing more
              nt Inc.                     project providing 2 more than code?                             units beyond the code minimum will not
                                                                                                          be prioritized over projects providing
                                                                                                          fewer units over the code minimum.




Pooja Dalal   Self        9% LIHTC        If the project meets more than 3 supplemental criteria, will    No, a project that meets more than 3
              Enhanceme   General         that project be preferred over a project that meets only 3      supplemental criteria will not be
              nt Inc.                     supplemental criteria?                                          preferred over projects that meet 3
                                                                                                          supplemental criteria.




Pooja Dalal   Self        Tiebreakers     Can b. be explained more, especially for emerging               This will be defined as a minimum of
              Enhanceme                   developers? What does significant Home fund leverage            $100,000 of available federal resources
              nt Inc.                     mean?                                                           committed to the project.




                                                                                                                                        142 |Page
                                                      2025 Oregon QAP

Pooja Dalal   Self        Tiebreakers   In Policy enriched: Are there certain policies which are more   No, there are no policies that are
              Enhanceme                 preferable than others, i.e. will PSH take priority over ECE?   preferable to others.
              nt Inc.




                                                                                                                                      143 |Page
